# 1-s2.0-S0304389423025013-main

**Source PDF**: 1-s2.0-S0304389423025013-main.pdf

---

## Page 1

Journal of Hazardous Materials 465 (2024) 133217
Available online 12 December 2023
0304-3894/© 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Research Paper 
Microbial defluorination of TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA by a native microbial 
consortium under anoxic conditions 
Zhiwen Tang a,b, Timothy M. Vogel c, Qing Wang a, Changlong Wei a, Mukhtiar Ali a,b, 
Xin Song a,b,* 
a Institute of Soil Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing 210008, China 
b University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China 
c Ecologie Microbienne, Universit´e Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Villeurbanne F-69622, France   
H I G H L I G H T S  
G R A P H I C A L  A B S T R A C T  
• The biodegradation of PFASs by a native 
microbial 
consortium was assessed 
under anoxic condition. 
• Fluoride production was confirmed in 
the biodegradation of TFA, PFOA and 
HFPO-DA. 
• Intermediate products of PFOA and 
HFPO-DA biodegradation were identi­
fied and quantitatively determined. 
• Species from the phyla of Nitrospirae, 
Proteobacteria, 
Actinobacteria, 
and 
Chloroflexi might be responsible for 
biodefluorination.  
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Editor: Lingxin Chen  
Keywords: 
PFCAs 
Biodegradation 
Defluorination 
Native microbial consortium 
A B S T R A C T   
In this study, the biodegradability of trifluoroacetate (TFA), perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), and perfluoro-2methyl-3-oxahexanoic acid (HFPO-DA) by a native microbial community was evaluated over a 10-month in­
cubation period. The observed microbial defluorination ratios and removal efficiency were 3.46 ( ± 2.73) % and 
8.03 ( ± 3.03) %, 8.44 ( ± 1.88) % and 13.52 ( ± 4.96) %, 3.02 ( ± 0.62) % and 5.45 ( ± 2.99) % for TFA, PFOA 
and HFPO-DA, respectively. The biodegradation intermediate products, TFA and pentafluoropropionic acid 
(PFA), of PFOA and HFPO-DA were detected in their biodegradation treatment groups. Furthermore, the con­
centrations of the PFOA metabolites, perfluorohexanoic acid (PFHxA) and perfluoroheptanoic acid (PFHpA), in 
the aqueous solutions after incubation were quantified to be 0.21 and 4.14 µg/L. TFA, PFOA and HFPO-DA 
significantly reduced the microbial diversity and changed the structure of the community. The co-occurrence 
network analysis showed that low abundance species, such as Flexilinea flocculi, Bacteriovorax stolpii, and 
g_Sphingomonas, are positively correlated with the generation of fluoride ion, implying their potential collabo­
rative functions contributing to the observed biodefluorination. The findings in this study can provide insights for 
* Correspondence to: 71 East Beijing Road, Nanjing 210008, China. 
E-mail address: xsong@issas.ac.cn (X. Song).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Journal of Hazardous Materials 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jhazmat 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2023.133217 
Received 2 September 2023; Received in revised form 30 November 2023; Accepted 8 December 2023

## Page 2

Journal of Hazardous Materials 465 (2024) 133217
2
the biodegradation of perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids and their emerging alternatives by indigenous microor­
ganisms in the environment.   
1. Introduction 
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs), known as "forever 
chemicals", are defined as fluorinated substances that contain at least 
one fully fluorinated methyl or methylene carbon atom (without any H/ 
Cl/Br/I atom) [48,66]. PFASs have been broadly used in various in­
dustrial and consumer applications due to their unique properties (e.g., 
surfactant properties, hydrophobicity, lipophobicity, and chemical/th­
ermal stability) [8]. However, these properties also contribute to their 
environmental persistence, bioaccumulation, and toxicity. The frequent 
detections of PFASs in the environment have raised growing concerns 
for public and ecosystem health [17,58]. Therefore, PFASs have been 
regulated by countries and institutions around world. For example, 
perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS), perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), 
and long-chain perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids (PFCAs), along with their 
salts and related compounds, were phased out by the Stockholm 
Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants [55]. The restricted use of 
legacy PFASs has led to the applications of their emerging alternatives, 
such as perfluoro-2-methyl-3-oxahexanoic acid (HFPO-DA), which has 
been used as a replacement for PFOA [44]. In China, the regulation on 
emerging contaminants was published this year, and the recommended 
values for PFOS and PFOA in drinking water were 40 and 80 ng/L, 
respectively [20]. 
In recent years, it has been reported that PFOA and HFPO-DA are the 
dominant PFCAs at industrial and non-industrial areas, with their con­
centrations up to hundreds of µg/kg in soil (or µg/L in groundwater) [56, 
65,67,71]. However, there is limited knowledge on the biodegradability 
of PFASs, particularly for perfluorinated compounds that are of signifi­
cance for their environmental fate. Due to their persistent nature 
contributed by the strength of C-F bond, their high negativity and 
fluoride toxicity, the natural breakdown of PFASs is highly difficult, with 
little or no current evidence of significant biodegradation. 
Microbial populations generally lack the adaptation to these syn­
thetic compounds that have only been released into the environment in 
the past century [60]. However, there are a handful of organofluorine 
natural products generated in biologic systems. For example, some 
plants and certain Gram-positive actinomycete species can produce a 
small number of fluorinated compounds, such as fluoroacetate, ω-fluo­
rinated fatty acids [9]. A fluorinase that incorporates fluoride into 
organic molecules has been identified and characterized in Streptomyces 
cattleya [9,16]. Recently, Xie et al. [69] found that the alkane degrader 
Pseudomonas sp. strain 273 can break the C-F bond of a natural 
mono-fluorinated organic compound (1-fluorodecane), most likely 
through the oxygenolytic enzyme system. Further work revealed that 
this bacterium can use inorganic fluoride to synthesize fluorinated 
anabolites and phospholipids that were subsequently incorporated into 
the lipid bilayer [70]. Hence, the finding that the C-F bond is not solely 
from anthropogenic sources implies that fluorinated organic compounds 
have been part of the biosphere and microbes might have evolved over 
time with functions being able to break and/or generate C-F bonds. In 
addition, based on thermodynamic calculations, reductive defluorina­
tion is energetically favorable under anaerobic conditions and would 
release more energy than those from sulfate reduction and methano­
genesis [51]. 
To date, exploratory experiments have been conducted to uncover 
biodefluorination and the associated degradation pathways of PFASs. 
For example, Visscher et al. [59] reported that trifluoroacetate (TFA), 
the shortest-chain PFCA, can be rapidly degraded under anoxic and oxic 
conditions with a methanogenic microbial community. Furthermore, 
TFA was found to be co-metabolically degraded in an engineered 
anaerobic reactor [30]. However, there is no further study on the 
microorganisms/enzymes that are responsible for the biodegradation of 
TFA. Liou et al. [35] utilized five microbial communities to degrade 
PFOA with different electron donors and co-metabolism substrates 
incubated for 259 days under anaerobic conditions, and no PFOA 
biodegradation was observed. On the other hand, Huang and Jaffe [25] 
demonstrated that Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6, in both pure and 
enriched culture, degraded PFOA/PFOS with efficiencies up to 60% 
after 100 days of incubation. The degradation was accompanied by an 
increase of fluoride ion and shorter-chain fluorinated compounds. In 
addition, the microbial defluorination of unsaturated PFASs containing 
C––C double bonds under both anaerobic and aerobic conditions was 
verified via reductive defluorination and/or hydrogenation pathways by 
organohalide-respiring microbial consortiums and activated sludge 
communities [73,74]. As put forward by Ernest Gale, the microbial 
infallibility hypothesis is that if there is energy to be gained from a 
compound, a microorganism will figure out how to extract it and create 
a niche for itself [19,34]. 
So far, based on the growth and reductive dehalogenase active 
expression, some unknown phylogenetic groups with low abundance, 
rather than Dehalococcoides, were responsible for the defluorination in 
the seed cultures [74]. Hence, further exploration of specific microbes 
responsible for the defluorination of PFASs from the perspective of their 
chemical structure is needed. In addition, the fate of PFASs in the 
environment and the potential defluorination ability by indigenous 
organohalide enriched consortium remain unclear. Therefore, the aim of 
this study was to explore the biodegradability of three typical per­
fluorinated compounds, TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA by a native microbial 
community collected from soils being exposed to PFASs and chlorinated 
solvents for decades. The associated microbial responses in the com­
munity were also examined. 
2. Materials and methods 
2.1. Chemicals and materials 
Standard compounds of TFA (CF3COOH, CAS: 76–05–1, 99.9%, 
J&K), 
PFOA 
(CF3CF2CF2CF2CF2CF2CF2COOH, 
CAS: 
335–67–1, 
99–100%, 
Aladdin), 
HFPO-DA 
(CF3CF2CF2OCFCF3COOH, 
CAS: 
13252–13–6, 99.7%, Wellington Lab) were purchased and prepared in 
stock solution. The basal mineral salt medium consisted of Na2HPO4, 
KH2PO4, (NH4)2SO4, MgSO4⋅7 H2O, the Wolin vitamin mix, and trace 
metals, all of which were analytical reagent grade or higher and pur­
chased from Aladdin (detailed ingredients provided in Supporting In­
formation, SI). Liquid chromatography grade methanol and ammonium 
acetate were obtained from Merck. All stock solutions were prepared by 
dissolving the chemical agents in sterilized ultrapure water (18.3 
MΩ⋅cm) generated from Milli-Q synthesis A10 system (Millipore, USA). 
The aquifer solids were sampled from in a fluorochemical plant, 
which has a history of long-term fluorinated and chlorinated chemicals 
production [56]. We used a core drilling rig to collect the aquifer solids 
from 15 to 18 m below ground surface, where high concentrations of 
PFASs and chlorinated solvents were detected in groundwater. The 
collected solids were transferred to the laboratory in sterilized bags and 
stored at 4 ◦C prior to further biodegradation microcosm assays. The 
total organic carbon (TOC) content in the aquifer solids were deter­
mined using the Walkley–Black method [46] and varied in the range 
from 0.02% to 0.06%. 
Z. Tang et al.

## Page 3

Journal of Hazardous Materials 465 (2024) 133217
3
2.2. Biodegradation microcosms and experimental setup 
In this study, the biodegradability of TFA, PFOA and HFPO-DA by the 
native microbial community from the above-mentioned aquifer solids 
was evaluated in serum bottle-based biodegradation assays for over 10 
months. The different treatments included a biological group (with or 
without PFASs labeled with “Biodegradation” and “Blank”, respectively) 
and an abiotic control (autoclaved three times, then PFASs added, 
labeled “Sterilized”). 
The initial concentrations used in the current study were 10 mg/L for 
TFA, 5 mg/L for PFOA and HFPO-DA, which were similar to those 
observed in the field in previous studies, e.g., 6.57 mg/L of PFOA in 
groundwater at Naval Air Station Fallon [43] and 9.7 mg/L of PFOS in 
groundwater of primary source sites [29]. Furthermore, the quantitative 
analyses of fluoride ion (F-) and the defluorination intermediate prod­
ucts were also considered in the selection of the initial concentrations of 
TFA, PFOA and HFPO-DA. These concentrations were chosen based on 
an initial assumption of 1% theoretical defluorination efficiency of TFA, 
PFOA and HFPO-DA, which would result in the F- concentrations in the 
serum bottles that would be high enough so that they can be quantita­
tively analyzed, but low enough (e.g., < 1 mM reported by Wackett 
[61]) so that they do not exert a toxic influence on the microbial 
consortium. 
Additionally, to simulate subsurface conditions, the incubation 
method used in this study was similar to previous procedures for the 
enrichment and cultivation during the reductive dechlorination of 
chlorinated aliphatic hydrocarbons [40]. Briefly, about 9 g (wet, 24.22% 
± 0.96%, moisture content) aquifer solids, 36 mL medium, and 36 mL 
PFCAs stock solution were added separately to maintain the ratios of 
solid-liquid (5–50%) and headspace (1–1.6:1) in the 120 mL serum 
bottles. Before the bottles were capped and sealed with blue butyl 
stoppers, 0.01% resazurin was added as the redox indicator. The 
observation of a light pink color at the end of 10-month period indicated 
the presence of oxygen during the incubation period in the current 
study. The initial pH was adjusted to ~7.2 in all groups, and there were 
slight/non-significant fluctuations of pH in different treatment groups, 
indicating that neutral conditions were maintained during the incuba­
tion period. All cultures were set up in triplicate and incubated at room 
temperature (~22˚C) in the dark without shaking. 
2.3. Determination of TFA, PFOA, HFPO-DA, intermediate products and 
fluoride ion 
Aqueous samples were taken during the incubation period for the 
measurements of TFA, PFOA, HFPO-DA and F-. Perfluorobutanoic acid 
(PFBA), perfluoropentanoic acid (PFPeA), perfluorohexanoic acid 
(PFHxA), and perfluoroheptanoic acid (PFHpA), the biodegradation 
intermediates of PFOA, were observed in the studies of Acidimicrobium 
sp. strain A6 [25,26]. Therefore, the potential intermediate products of 
PFCAs, including C2-C7 PFCAs and acetate, were analyzed quantitively 
to support the evaluation of TFA, PFOA, HFPO-DA biodegradation. 
The PFASs concentrations were quantified by UPLC (ExionLC™ AD, 
AB Sciex, USA) coupled with a Sciex 5500 triple-quadrupole mass 
spectrometer operated by negative electrospray ionization (ESI) in a 
multiple reaction monitoring mode (MRM). The limits of detection 
(LOD) were calculated with a signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio of 3, and the 
LODs for TFA, PFOA, HFPO-DA were 0.2, 0.03 and 0.05 µg/L, respec­
tively. The F- in the culture was determined by Dionex ICS-5000+ Ionchromatography system Chromeleon 7.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 
USA). The retention time of F- was 4.67 min, and its LOD was deter­
mined to be 0.006 mg/L. The acetate in the culture was measured by 
liquid chromatography coupled with C18 column (Thermo Fisher Sci­
entific, USA) and its LOD was 0.5 mg/L (Retention time: 4.51 min, UV 
214 nm). Additionally, the concentrations of CO2 and CH4 in the 
headspace of sealed bottles, the end-products of PFCAs degradation and 
indicators of microbial activities [59,76], were measured at the end of 
the incubation by gas chromatography (GC-7890A, Wilmington, USA). 
More details were provided in SI. 
2.4. DNA extraction and PacBio sequencing 
Community DNA was extracted from 5 mL of mixed culture using the 
E.Z.N.A.® soil DNA Kit (Omega Bio-Tek, Norcross, USA) according to 
the manufacturer’s protocol, which was consistent with our previous 
work [56]. To obtain more accurate phylogenetic identification, the 
full-length 16 S rRNA gene amplicon (27 F: 5’-AGRGTTYGA­
TYMTGGCTCAG-3’ and 1492 R: 5’-RGYTACCTTGTTACGACTT-3’) was 
sequenced with a PacBio Sequel. PacBio raw reads were processed using 
the SMRT Link Analysis software version 9.0 to obtain demultiplexed 
circular consensus sequence (CCS) reads. The detailed PCR amplifica­
tion, library construction and sequencing were provided in SI. 
Raw reads were processed and filtered through SMRT Portal with 
sequences length between 1301 and 1500 bp, which accounted for 
98.51% of the total sequences. The operational taxonomic units (OTUs) 
were clustered with 98.65% similarity cutoff using UPARSE (version 7.1 
http://drive5.com/uparse/) and chimeric sequences were identified and 
removed using UCHIME. The obtained reads were deposited in the NCBI 
Sequence Read Archive with the project number (PRJNA995193). The 
phylogenetic affiliation of each 16 S rRNA gene sequence was analyzed 
by RDP Classifier (http://rdp.cme.msu.edu/) against the silva (SSU132) 
16 S rRNA database using the confidence threshold of 70%. The OTUs 
not assigned to the Kingdom Bacteria were excluded from the obtained 
sequences for each sample, which were then normalized to the equal 
sequencing depth (8114 sequences) for downstream analysis. 
2.5. Data analysis 
The biological removal efficiency, defined as the concentration dif­
ference between the sterilized group and the microbial treatment groups 
divided by the concentration in the sterilized group, was calculated 
using Eq. 1. The defluorination ratios of TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA were 
determined by dividing the maximum fluoride formed by the fluoride 
number in the sterilized group (Eq. 2). It is worth noting that the bio­
logical removal efficiency was calculated based on the assumption that 
the removal of TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA from aqueous solutions could 
be contributed to both the biodegradation of chemicals (i.e., the 
breakdown of bonds) and biosorption.  
Biological removal efficiency(%) = PFAS conc. in (Sterilized group −Biodegradation group)
PFAS conc. in sterilized group
× 100%
(1)  
Defluorination ratio(%) =
Max. fluoride formed
PFAS conc. in sterilized group × number of F in one molecule × 100%
(2)   
Z. Tang et al.

## Page 4

Journal of Hazardous Materials 465 (2024) 133217
4
The community abundance, diversity, and coverage were interpreted 
using Alpha diversity indices calculated from OTUs by Mothur (version 
v.1.30.1). The one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to 
examine the difference in microbial alpha-diversity at a significance 
threshold of 0.05. The consistency of the microbial community structure 
in the samples was assessed using principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) 
based on the Bray-Curtis distances matrix. Rarefaction curves (Fig. S1), 
Venn diagrams and microbial community composition profiles were 
created by R (version 4.2.1). 
Molecular co-occurrence ecological networks were established to 
explore the potential defluorination microorganisms in microcosmic 
samples [18]. The OTUs were filtered and those detected in more than 
50% of samples were used as the input of the network following the 
principle of majority selection [18]. The SparCC method was applied to 
construct the network using the OTUs selected with the threshold of 
correlation coefficients (r) > 0.6 and p-value < 0.05. All correlations 
with better correlation coefficients and p-values, identified from the 
pairwise comparison of the abundance of OTUs, formed a correlation 
network where each node represented one OTU, and each edge repre­
sented a strong and significant correlation between two nodes. The 
interactive Gephi platform was used to visualize the network and to 
further identify ecological clusters (i.e., modules) of taxa with strong 
correlations among each other [4]. Furthermore, linear regressions be­
tween the ecological clusters and generation of F- were calculated to 
obtain the microbial community modules with positive correlations. The 
correlation heatmap among microbial community modules, the gener­
ation of F- and the removal efficiency of PFASs was then prepared to 
explore the potential participation of microbes in the ecological clusters. 
3. Results and discussion 
3.1. Biological removal efficiency of TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA in 
different treatments 
The biological removal efficiency of TFA, PFOA and HFPO-DA in the 
microbial treatments after 10 months incubation, was 8.03 ( ± 3.03) %, 
13.52 ( ± 4.96) %, and 5.45 ( ± 2.99) %, respectively (Fig. 1 and 
Table S1). The result demonstrated that TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA can 
be removed by the microorganisms. However, it is worth noting that the 
concentrations of PFOA or HFPO-DA in aqueous solutions were signifi­
cantly lower than the initial concentration in the sterilized treatments 
(Table S1), whereas the concentration of TFA was slightly lower than its 
initial concentration. We speculated that this observation was primarily 
due to the sorption of TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA onto or into the aquifer 
solids, as discussed below. 
Previous studies showed that the sorption behaviors of PFASs in soil 
are affected by the molecule structure and soil properties [47,68]. The 
hydrophobicity of PFASs is contributed by CF2 fragment and PFASs with 
higher hydrophobicity (log Kow) values have a higher affinity for organic 
matter and minerals present in the solids [32,68]. Therefore, the 
different levels of reduced concentration observed in the aqueous solu­
tion between PFOA/HFPO-DA and TFA in the sterilized group could be 
explained by their different hydrophobicity values (i.e., the log Kow of 
PFOA is 4.67 [68], is 4.0 for HFPO-DA [24], and 0.5 for TFA [45]. In 
addition to the structure of PFASs, the soil physico-chemical properties, 
such as cation exchange capacity, pH, micropore volume, and 
silt-plus-clay content play important roles in the PFASs sorption [47]. 
For example, Liu et al. [36] reported that more than 50% of PFOA 
(2.0 mg/L) could be adsorbed by soils through mechanisms including 
surface complexation, hydrogen bonding, and electrostatic force. This is 
similar to the percentage observed for PFOA in this study. 
3.2. Defluorination ratio and biodegradation pathway for TFA, PFOA, 
and HFPO-DA 
The release of F- has been used as the most critical indicator for the 
degradation of PFASs [25,57,73]. The concentration of F- and 
defluorination ratios in the treatments with and without PFASs are 
shown in Fig. 2 and Table S1. The results revealed that compared to the 
blank and sterilized treatments, F- was detected in all the biodegradation 
treatments. The concentrations of F- in TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA 
biodegradation groups were 0.166 ( ± 0.134) mg/L, 0.119 ( ± 0.023) 
mg/L, and 0.068 ( ± 0.013) mg/L, respectively (Fig. 2 and Table S1). 
The corresponding defluorination ratios of TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA 
were 3.46 ( ± 2.73) %, 8.44 ( ± 1.88) %, and 3.02 ( ± 0.62) %, 
respectively (Fig. 2 and Table S1). 
Kim et al. [30] indicated that TFA could be completely degraded 
with a 100% release of F- through a co-metabolism process in an 
anaerobic bioreactor after a 630-day incubation. However, there has 
been no further report on the successful biodefluorination of TFA. 
Similarly, there is no robust evidence of PFOA biodefluorination except 
by Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6, which can achieve ~11% or ~36% 
defluorination ratios in pure culture or its enrichment culture [25]. 
Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge, there have been no reports 
on the successful biodegradation of HFPO-DA (Table S2). Therefore, the 
current results provided the strongest evidence to date for the bio­
defluorination of TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA. Further calculation of 
fluorine content balance revealed that the total fluorine content of the 
selected PFASs in biodegradation groups showed lower values than their 
corresponding sterilized groups (Table S3). The lower calculated fluo­
rine contents in the biodegradation groups can be attributed to the un­
accounted intermediates, e.g., the fluorine in TFA and PFA, which were 
detected, but not quantified, hence not accounted for in the calculation. 
Fig. 1. The biological removal efficiency of TFA, PFOA and HFPO-DA groups after 10 months incubation. Note: the values represented the average and standard 
deviations of triplicate samples. 
Z. Tang et al.

## Page 5

Journal of Hazardous Materials 465 (2024) 133217
5
In addition, the potential intermediate products were identified and 
summarized in the current study (Fig. S2) and inputs from previous 
studies as shown in Fig. 2c [3,13,14,25,30,49,59]. TFA and PFA were 
detected as the intermediate products in both the PFOA and HFPO-DA 
biodegradation groups. In addition, concentrations of PFHxA and 
PFHpA were quantified to be 0.21 and 4.14 µg/L in the aqueous solu­
tions of PFOA biodegradation group after the 10-month incubation 
period. Note that the Σ17PFASs concentrations in the aquifer solids from 
the sampling site ranged from 7.65 ng/g dw to 20.2 ng/g dw at various 
depths [15] and were much lower than the detected concentrations in 
this microcosm study. 
Furthermore, the detections of only PFHpA and PFHxA as the in­
termediate products were different from the PFOA biodegradation by 
Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6 in which all short-chain PFCAs, i.e., PFHpA, 
PFHxA, PFPeA, and PFBA, were produced during the Feammox process 
[25]. We speculate that the lack of detections of PFBA and PFPeA might 
be attributed to the degradation of PFBA and PFPeA by the consortium, 
since PFBA and PFPeA were known to be more readily degraded than 
TFA as indicated by previous advanced reduction process of hydrated 
electron reactions [6,50]. Moreover, we speculate that the synergistic 
functions of different microorganisms in the consortium vs. the pure 
culture of Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6 may contribute to the discrep­
ancy observed in the two studies. For the HFPO-DA biodegradation 
group, no other short-chain PFCAs were detected, instead, there was an 
unidentified intermediate product (m/z: 212.9/169.9) detected 
(Fig. S2). Furthermore, the biodegradation of TFA has been a major 
challenge, and there is no further study on the microorganisms/enzymes 
that are responsible for the biodegradation of TFA, which was reported 
by Visscher et al. [59] and Kim et al., [30]. However, it is worth noting 
that 
Alexandrino 
et 
al., 
[2] 
confirmed 
the 
generation 
of 
mono-fluoroacetate, a metabolite resulted from the anaerobic biodeg­
radation of TFA, which underwent biodegradation with the release of 
fluoride ions by microbial cultures with different origins. Therefore, as 
supported by the conclusions in previous studies [25,74], it was inferred 
that decarboxylation, hydrolytic elimination and H/F exchange might 
be the main pathways to achieve defluorination of selected PFASs 
(Fig. 2c). 
Additionally, acetate was considered as a key byproduct of degra­
dation of PFASs (Fig. 2c), as evidenced in previous studies [25,30]. 
However, we were not able to quantify the concentration of acetate in 
Fig. 2. Concentration of F-(a), defluorination ratios (b) and proposed biodegradation pathways (c) for TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA based on the intermediates 
identified in this study and previous studies. Note: the green color labeled chemicals have been detected as intermediate products in the current study and the 
chemicals in the box with dashed lines are potential intermediates based on previous studies. 
Z. Tang et al.

## Page 6

Journal of Hazardous Materials 465 (2024) 133217
6
the samples due to an unknown peak (Retention time: 2.75 min, UV 
214 nm) that exhibited significantly higher intensity in the biological 
groups (Blank and Biodegradation groups) (Fig. S3). Considering the 
same absorbance of 214 nm, we speculate that the unknown compound 
might be a fatty acid originated from the aquifer solid. Hence, though 
the identification and quantitative determination of intermediate 
products provided a second line of evidence to support the occurrence of 
PFOA and HFPO-DA biodegradation, more mechanistic studies are 
warranted for this indigenous microbial consortium. 
3.3. Characterization and activity of the defluorination microbial 
community 
3.3.1. Richness and diversity variation of the microbial communities 
Fig. 3 and Table S4 compared the richness and diversity of the mi­
crobial communities among these treatments. The community richness 
and evenness were assessed using the Ace (a) and Shannon (b) indices, 
with higher values suggesting a greater number and diversity of mi­
crobial species. Compared with the Blank group, both the Ace and 
Shannon indices at OTUs level significantly decreased after the addition 
of TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA (Fig. 3a & b). The exposure of TFA, PFOA, 
and HFPO-DA might have inhibited the growth and activities of mi­
croorganisms and led to reduced species richness and diversity, even 
though the indigenous microbial community had been exposed to rela­
tively high concentrations of PFASs and chlorinated solvents for de­
cades. These results provide additional support for the lower microbial 
diversity observed after being exposed to PFASs in the field in previous 
investigations [53,56]. In this study, the reduction of microbial diversity 
caused by PFOA was significantly greater than that caused by TFA and 
HFPO-DA, even though the TFA concentration at 10 mg/L was twice 
that of PFOA. Similarly, Liu et al. [37] reported that PFOA and HFPO-DA 
could restrict diversification of rhizosphere soil bacterial communities, 
and single or mixed PFAS had different influences on the diversity. 
PCoA based on Bray-curtis distance was applied to evaluate the 
overall patterns of variations in the microbial community profiles after 
the addition TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA (Fig. 3c). The microbial com­
munity profiles were clustered into four separate groups according to 
the treatments. In particular, the distance between selected PFASs 
groups and the Blank varied with the structure of PFCAs. This result 
further suggested that the exposure and structure of PFASs can alter the 
structure and compositions of microbial community. In addition, the 
clusters corresponding to PFOA and HFPO-DA are more closely related 
to each other than to the cluster associated with TFA. It has been re­
ported that PFOA has adverse effects on the soil ecosystem [12,37], 
considering the close distance between PFOA and HFPO-DA, the use of 
HFPO-DA as an alternative should be assessed carefully. 
The four separate groups’ OTUs derived from PCoA were compared 
to understand the variability of microbial communities (Fig. 3d). The 
total OTUs after exposure of PFCAs were lower than the Blank. There 
were 6204, 4316, 1882 and 2938 unique OTUs in each of these four 
individual groups, respectively, with a total of 201 core OTUs shared by 
all treatments. Given that the difficulty of biodefluorination, these 
shared OTUs might contain putative microorganisms capable of 
degrading PFCA and the specific microbes in these groups need to be 
explored. Collectively, the diversity of the microbial community 
decreased notably after exposure with TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA despite 
the presence of shared microorganisms that might play important roles 
in defluorination. 
Fig. 3. Alpha diversity indices (Ace and Shannon, a and b) and Beta diversity of the microbial communities (principal coordinates analysis based on Bray-curtis 
distance of OTUs level, c), and Venn diagrams of core OTUs among four treatments (d). Different letters represent significant differences based on one-way 
ANOVA with LSD’s comparisons. 
Z. Tang et al.

## Page 7

Journal of Hazardous Materials 465 (2024) 133217
7
3.3.2. Microbial community compositions 
Fig. 4 depicts the microbial community distribution and variation at 
the phylum and species levels after incubation with PFASs. The major 
bacterial phyla in Blank were Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes, which 
accounted for 74.27% (Fig. 4a). This aligns with our previous field 
investigation, where Proteobacteria was the dominant phylum with 
relative abundance among 61.58–87.23% in PFASs and chlorinated 
solvents contaminated groundwater [56]. It indicates that microbial 
community maintained a similar profile in aquifer solids, and micro­
cosmic incubation did not alter the major niche for the ecosystem. After 
incubation with selected PFASs, Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes 
remained the prevailing phyla, constituting 56.52%, 64.91%, and 
77.85% in the TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA groups, respectively. 
Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes have been identified as the major 
secretors of extracellular polymeric substances, which act as a cell 
protective barrier, electron acceptor, and nutrient source [33,64]. In 
addition, many colonies in these two phyla were identified with the 
functionalities of organic pollutant biodegradation as well as the carbon, 
nitrogen, and sulfur cycling [42,54]. Chen et al. [11] recently observed 
that Proteobacteria became the dominant phylum after 60 days of PFOA 
exposure. Besides these two tolerant phyla, some phyla were enriched 
by the addition of TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA, specifically. For example, 
Nitrospirae, Acidobacteria, Actinobacteria and Chloroflexi exhibited 
higher abundance in TFA and PFOA groups, while no phyla with higher 
abundance were observed in the HFPO-DA group, except of Acid­
obacteria and Gemmatimonadetes. Although it was challenging to link 
defluorination with the changes of these phyla, the enriched phyla were 
reported with the abilities to degrade complex organic compounds such 
as alkanes, aromatic and halogenated hydrocarbons as well as carbox­
ylic compounds [22,38]. 
The variations of microbial community compositions and relative 
abundance at the species level (top 30) were analyzed to provide further 
insight into the functional microorganisms after PFASs exposure 
(Fig. 4b). Some species, such as Luteitalea pratensis, Manganitrophus 
noduliformans, Methylobacillus flagellatus, and Methylovorus glucoso­
trophus, were at high abundance in the PFASs groups. Though none of 
them was reported to be associated with PFASs biodegradation, these 
species were involved in carbon cycling such as the oxidation of CH4, 
autotrophic CO2 fixation, and assimilation processes [23,39,72]. For 
example, Liu et al. [39] reported that Luteitalea pratensis played a vital 
role in the syntrophic pathway for manganese-dependent anaerobic 
oxidation of CH4 to CO2 by mediating extracellular electron transfer and 
participating in the microbial manganese reduction. Manganitrophus 
noduliformans was found to be responsible for coupling extracellular 
manganese oxidation to aerobic energy conservation and CO2 fixation 
into cellular biomass [72]. 
Additionally, some species, such as Nitrosospira sp900110495 and 
Nitrospira defluvii in TFA group, Pseudomonas stutzeri and Truepera 
radiovictrix in PFOA group, and Nitrosomonas nitrosa in HFPO-DA group, 
were enriched. Strains of these species have been identified and linked 
with the key processes of the nitrogen cycle, such as ammonia oxidation 
and nitrification/denitrification [31,41]. Furthermore, the genome of 
these 
species 
carries 
antibiotic-resistance 
genes 
and 
can 
co-metabolically transform fluorinated antibiotics through defluorina­
tion reactions [78]. The effects of selected species enrichment by PFCAs 
in the current study were similar to those observed in previous studies 
carried out by Chen et al. [11] and Chen et al. [12], in which denitrifying 
bacteria 
were 
significantly 
enriched, 
possibly 
due 
to 
the 
antibiotic-resistant genes harbored under the stress of PFOA exposure. 
However, there was no follow-up investigation between the denitrifiers 
and biodefluorination of PFASs. Hence, future investigations are war­
ranted to determine correlation among the biodefluorination, denitrifi­
cation and antibiotic-resistant genes. 
3.3.3. Concentration changes of CO2 and CH4 in different treatments 
At the end of 10-month incubation, the concentrations of CO2 in all 
biodegradation treatments were higher than those in the sterilized 
treatments (Fig. 5a). The production of CO2, one of the final products for 
organic pollutant biodegradation, has been observed in aerobic oxida­
tion and anaerobic fermentation of chemicals containing carboxylic 
acids. For example, microbes can gain energy from organic carboxylic 
acids through Krebs cycle or decarboxylic reaction, which can result in 
the production of CO2 [63]. 
Previous studies indicated that microorganisms might prefer to 
attack at non-fluorinated moieties, such as carboxylates or sulfonates, as 
the initial reaction point during the metabolic transformation for PFASs 
rather than a direct attack on the C-F bonds [10,62,77]. Yet, so far, only 
TFA biodegradation was verified by Visscher et al. [59], and no other 
study reported that PFCAs can be decarboxylated or mineralized by 
microbes. On the other hand, the generation of CO2 was verified in 
PFCAs chemical degradation (i.e., non-biological) and decarboxylating 
was considered as the rate-limiting step [14,57,76]. With the above 
mentioned, the increased CO2 in the biodegradation treatments might 
have been contributed by the biodegradation of TFA, PFOA, and 
HFPO-DA. However, the microbial oxidation and/or fermentation of 
organic matter, which can be TOC (0.02–0.06%) from aquifer solids or 
the biomass in the system, played a more substantial role in the 
increased production of CO2 and might conceal the contribution of 
Fig. 4. Compositions and abundance of the microbial community at the phylum(a), and species levels (b). Relative abundance of phylum is presented by the mean 
value and the top 30 species in each sample were showed in the heatmap. 
Z. Tang et al.

## Page 8

Journal of Hazardous Materials 465 (2024) 133217
8
PFCAs biodegradation. 
Additionally, the concentration of CO2 in the blank treatment was 
significantly lower compared to those in the sterilized treatments. Pre­
vious studies indicated that autotrophic and heterotrophic microbes can 
fix CO2 through six well-known pathways, such as Calvin cycle and 
reductive citrate cycle [5] and cellular metabolism [7]. Recent studies 
found that some microbes can utilize or capture CO2 and convert it to 
organic compounds, such as biomass and desired metabolites [1,27]. 
Therefore, the reduction of CO2 in the Blank group might be related to 
the microbial sequestration of CO2 via pathways such as the microbial 
carboxylation reaction by the microbial consortium [1,52]. The identi­
fication of autotrophic and heterotrophic microorganisms, such as 
Manganitrophus 
noduliformans, 
Methylobacillus 
flagellatus, 
Meso­
rhizobium, Haliangium ochraceum, in the community further supported 
this observation (Fig. 4b). 
Concentrations of CH4 in all treatments were lower than the con­
centration in air (Fig. 5b). The result indicated that there is no sub­
stantial CH4 production in the system, consistent with the observation of 
a light pink color at the end of 10-month period, which indicated the 
presence of oxygen during the incubation period in the current study. 
The microbial defluorination of TFA and the production of CH4 were 
verified in an earlier study [59], and it was concluded that the meth­
anogenic conditions might be favorable for its biodegradation. 
Fig. 5. Concentrations of CO2 (a) and CH4 (b) in different treatments. The dotted line represents concentration in the air at the end of 10-month incubation period.  
Fig. 6. Microbial co-occurrence network analysis and potential defluorination microbes. Network diagram with nodes colored according to the four ecological 
clusters, Module #1–4 (a), the relative abundance of the four modules in the different treatments (b), the linear relationship between F- concentration and the relative 
abundance of ecological Module #2 in selected groups (c), the relationships between species of Module #2 and the generation of F-, as well as the removal efficiency 
of TFA, PFOA and HFPO-DA (d). * **p ≤0.001; * *0.001 < p ≤0.01; *indicating 0.01 < p ≤0.05. 
Z. Tang et al.

## Page 9

Journal of Hazardous Materials 465 (2024) 133217
9
3.4. Co-occurrence network: potential defluorination microbes 
The molecular co-occurrence network, constructed using 4650 as­
sociations among the shared 279 bacterial taxa and spearman correla­
tion, was combined to further explore potential defluorination microbes 
(Fig. 6). Microbes potentially contributing to the removal of TFA, PFOA 
and HFPO-DA were grouped into four ecological modules, generated 
according to the correlation matrix (r > 0.6 and p-value < 0.05) of the 
microbial communities in Fig. 6a. Four modules comprised multiple 
taxa, and the total relative abundance of each module are presented in 
Fig. S4 and Fig. 6b. With the exception of Module #2, the PFOA and 
HFPO-DA groups exhibited higher total relative abundance in the 
remaining three ecological clusters. While the relative abundance of 
each treatment varied across the ecological clusters, the taxa composi­
tion within each module exhibited consistent patterns. For instance, 
Bacteroidetes occupied a dominant niche (71.28 ± 13.40%, mean) in all 
four groups from Module #1, whereas Proteobacteria emerged as the 
dominant taxa (65.02 ± 28.85%, mean) in Module #3. 
Additionally, Module #2 and Module #4, composed of Proteobac­
teria, Bacteroidetes, and Nitrospirae, exhibited higher taxa diversity and 
evenness. The relationships between different ecological modules and 
the generation of F- in selected groups were further calculated and are 
shown in Fig. 6c and Fig. S5. Only the relative abundance of Module #2 
is positively correlated to the generation of F- (R2 = 0.8688, RMSE =
0.03628) after the incubation with TFA, PFOA and HFPO-DA. This 
suggests that microorganisms in Module #2 are likely to participate in 
the defluorination process. 
Correlations between the relative abundance of species in Module #2 
and the generation of F- in TFA, PFOA and HFPO-DA groups, as well as 
the corresponding removal efficiency were depicted in Fig. 6d. After 
removing the interrelationships with p > 0.5 or |r| < 0.8 among the 96 
species within Module #2, there are 24 remaining significant in­
terrelationships. The majority of species are positively correlated with 
the removal efficiency of chemicals and the production of F-. The cor­
relations show consistency between the removal efficiency of TFA, PFOA 
and HFPO-DA and the production of F-. The species involved in these 
positive correlations may play essential roles in the degradation process 
of TFA, PFOA and HFPO-DA. 
As outlined in 3.3.2, certain species enriched during the biodegra­
dation process carried genes related to carbon utilization, nitrogen 
cycling, and antibiotic resistance. Specifically, Bacteriovorax stolpii, 
g_Sphingomonas and Methylobacillus flagellatus, belonging to Proteobac­
teria; Nitrospira defluvii and c_Nitrospira, belonging to Nitrospirae; Flex­
ilinea flocculi, belonging to Chloroflexi; Solibacter usitatus, belonging to 
Acidobacteria, were identified in associated with these processes [21,23, 
28,41,75]. Moreover, these species exhibited a significant positive cor­
relation with the generation of F- as well as the removal efficiency of 
TFA, PFOA and HFPO-DA. Therefore, some species, such as Flexilinea 
flocculi, Bacteriovorax stolpii, and g_Sphingomonas, might be responsible 
for the defluorination through their potential collaborative functions. 
However, the corresponding relative abundance of these species showed 
that all of them have low abundance within the microbial community 
(Fig. S6). Therefore, more advanced microbial technologies, such as 
metagenomic binning and flow cytometer, are needed to characterize 
and identify these members of low abundance within the microbial 
community. 
4. Conclusions 
The objective of this study was to evaluate the biodegradability of 
TFA, PFOA and HFPO-DA by a native microbial community collected 
from PFASs and chlorinated solvents co-contaminated site and to 
explore the microbes in the community potentially participating in the 
biodegradation process. The generation of F- and intermediate shortchain PFCAs, including TFA, PFA, PFHpA and PFHxA, were the key 
lines of evidence for the biodegradation of TFA, PFOA and HFPO-DA by 
the indigenous microbial consortium. The co-occurrence network anal­
ysis showed that some low abundance species, such as Flexilinea flocculi, 
Bacteriovorax stolpii, and g_Sphingomonas, are positively correlated with 
the defluorination ratios and might participate in the biodefluorination 
processes through their potential collaborative functions. These findings 
provided insights in understanding the fate of PFCAs and their emerging 
alternatives in soil and groundwater. However, further studies are 
needed to address the limitations of the current study. Examples of such 
studies include the dynamics of the microbial communities beyond the 
incubation period of 10 months, the mechanisms explaining the lack of 
certain intermediates such as PFBA and PFPeA, and the exploration of 
unconfirmed compounds as well as how the functional species collab­
oratively play a role in the process. Furthermore, extensive studies are 
needed for future applications to the real-world environmental 
concerns. 
Environmental Implication 
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) have emerged as a 
group of contaminants of concern due to their persistence in the envi­
ronment, bioaccumulation, and potential toxicity to human health and 
ecosystems. However, the degradation of PFASs poses significant chal­
lenges owing to the strong C-F bonds in their chemical structure. This 
study investigates the biodegradation of three representative PFASs by a 
native microbial consortium. The findings contribute valuable insights 
into the biodegradability of PFASs, enhancing our understanding of their 
potential degradation in the environment. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Zhiwen Tang: Conceptualization, Data curation, Methodology, 
Writing - original draft, Investigation, Visualization. Timothy M. Vogel: 
Writing - review & editing, Validation, Methodology. Qing Wang: 
Methodology, Investigation, Resources. Changlong Wei: Methodology, 
Visualization, Software. Mukhtiar Ali: Methodology, Visualization, 
Investigation. Xin Song: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Vali­
dation, Writing - review & editing, Supervision. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Data availability 
Data will be made available on request. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (32061133001 and 42277029) and the CSCEC EcoEnvironmental Engineering Research Center (Soil Remediation Tech­
nology and Equipment) (CSCEC-PT-009). We acknowledge the cooper­
ation between China and the EU through the EiCLaR project (European 
Union’s Horizon 2020, N◦965945). We also acknowledge the help of 
Wei Qian from Soil and Environment Analysis Center for the quantita­
tive analysis of fluoride ion concentrations. 
Appendix A. Supporting information 
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the 
online version at doi:10.1016/j.jhazmat.2023.133217. 
Z. Tang et al.

## Page 10

Journal of Hazardous Materials 465 (2024) 133217
10
References 
[1] Ahn, Y.J., Lee, J.A., Choi, K.R., Bang, J., Lee, S.Y., 2022. Can microbes be 
harnessed to reduce atmospheric loads of greenhouse gases? Environ Microbiol. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1462-2920.16161. 
[2] Alexandrino, D.A.M., Ribeiro, I., Pinto, L.M., Cambra, R., Oliveira, R.S., Pereira, F., 
et al., 2018. Biodegradation of mono-, di- and trifluoroacetate by microbial 
cultures with different origins. N Biotechnol 43, 23–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
nbt.2017.08.005. 
[3] Bao, Y., Deng, S., Jiang, X., Qu, Y., He, Y., Liu, L., et al., 2018. Degradation of PFOA 
substitute: GenX (HFPO-DA ammonium salt): oxidation with UV/persulfate or 
reduction with UV/sulfite? Environ Sci Technol 52 (20), 11728–11734. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b02172. 
[4] Bastian, M., Heymann, S., Jacomy, M., 2009. Gephi: an open source software for 
exploring and manipulating networks. Proc Int AAAI Conf web Soc Media 
361–362. 
[5] Berg, I.A., 2011. Ecological aspects of the distribution of different autotrophic CO2 
fixation pathways. Appl Environ Microbiol 77 (6), 1925–1936. https://doi.org/ 
10.1128/AEM.02473-10. 
[6] Bentel, M.J., Yu, Y., Xu, L., Li, Z., Wong, B.M., Men, Y., et al., 2019. Defluorination 
of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) with hydrated electrons: structural 
dependence and implications to PFAS remediation and management. Environ Sci 
Technol 53 (7), 3718–3728. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b06648. 
[7] Braun, A., Spona-Friedl, M., Avramov, M., Elsner, M., Baltar, F., Reinthaler, T., 
et al., 2021. Reviews and syntheses: heterotrophic fixation of inorganic 
carbon–significant but invisible flux in environmental carbon cycling. 
Biogeosciences 18 (12), 3689–3700. 
[8] Buck, R.C., Korzeniowski, S.H., Laganis, E., Adamsky, F., 2021. Identification and 
classification of commercially relevant per-and poly-fluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). 
Integr Environ Assess Manag 17 (5), 1045–1055. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
ieam.4450. 
[9] Carvalho, M.F., Oliveira, R.S., 2017. Natural production of fluorinated compounds 
and biotechnological prospects of the fluorinase enzyme. Crit Rev Biotechnol 37 
(7), 880–897. https://doi.org/10.1080/07388551.2016.1267109. 
[10] Cerro-Galvez, E., Roscales, J.L., Jimenez, B., Sala, M.M., Dachs, J., Vila-Costa, M., 
2020. Microbial responses to perfluoroalkyl substances and 
perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) desulfurization in the Antarctic marine 
environment. Water Res 171, 115434. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
watres.2019.115434. 
[11] Chen, C., Fang, Y., Cui, X., Zhou, D., 2022. Effects of trace PFOA on microbial 
community and metabolisms: microbial selectivity, regulations and risks. Water 
Res 226. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2022.119273. 
[12] Chen, C., Fang, Y., Zhou, D., 2023. Selective pressure of PFOA on microbial 
community: enrichment of denitrifiers harboring ARGs and the transfer of ferricelectrons. Water Res 233. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2023.119813. 
[13] Cheng, Z.W., Chen, Q.C., Liu, Z.K., Liu, J.Y., Liu, Y.W., Liu, S.Q., et al., 2021. 
Interpretation of reductive PFAS defluorination with quantum chemical 
parameters. Environ Sci Technol Lett 8 (8), 645–650. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
estlett.1c00403. 
[14] Ding, X., Song, X., Chen, X., Ding, D., Xu, C., Chen, H., 2022. Degradation and 
mechanism of hexafluoropropylene oxide dimer acid by thermally activated 
persulfate in aqueous solutions. Chemosphere 286 (Pt 2), 131720. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2021.131720. 
[15] Ding, X., Song, X., Xu, M., Yao, J., Xu, C., Tang, Z., et al., 2022. Co-occurrence and 
correlations of PFASs and chlorinated volatile organic compounds (cVOCs) in 
subsurface in a fluorochemical industrial park: Laboratory and field investigations. 
Sci Total Environ 814, 152814. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.152814. 
[16] Dong, C., Huang, F., Deng, H., Schaffrath, C., Spencer, J.B., O’Hagan, D., et al., 
2004. Crystal structure and mechanism of a bacterial fluorinating enzyme. Nature 
427 (6974), 561–565. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature02280. 
[17] Evich, M.G., Davis, M.J.B., McCord, J.P., Acrey, B., Awkerman, J.A., Knappe, D.R. 
U., et al., 2022. Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances in the environment. Science 
375 (6580), eabg9065. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abg9065. 
[18] Feng, K., Peng, X., Zhang, Z., Gu, S., He, Q., Shen, W., et al., 2022. iNAP: an 
integrated network analysis pipeline for microbiome studies. iMeta 1 (2). https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/imt2.13. 
[19] Gale,E.F., 1951. The chemical activities of bacteria. 
[20] GB 5746–2022, 2023. Standards for drinking water quality (in Chinese). 
[21] Ghimire-Kafle, S., Weaver, M.E., Bollmann, A., 2023. Ecophysiological and 
genomic characterization of the freshwater complete ammonia oxidizer Nitrospira 
sp. strain BO4. e01965-01922 Appl Environ Microbiol 0 (0). https://doi.org/ 
10.1128/aem.01965-22. 
[22] He, K., Asada, Y., Echigo, S., Itoh, S., 2020. Biodegradation of pharmaceuticals and 
personal care products in the sequential combination of activated sludge treatment 
and soil aquifer treatment. Environ Technol 41 (3), 378–388. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/09593330.2018.1499810. 
[23] Hemmann, J.L., Keller, P., Hemmerle, L., Vonderach, T., Ochsner, A.M., BortfeldMiller, M., et al., 2023. Lanpepsy is a novel lanthanide-binding protein involved in 
the lanthanide response of the obligate methylotroph Methylobacillus flagellatus. 
J Biol Chem 299 (3). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2023.102940. 
[24] Hopkins, Z.R., Sun, M., DeWitt, J.C., Knappe, D.R., 2018. Recently detected 
drinking water contaminants: GenX and other per-and polyfluoroalkyl ether acids. 
J Water Works Assoc 110 (7), 13–28. https://doi.org/10.1002/awwa.1073. 
[25] Huang, S., Jaffe, P.R., 2019. Defluorination of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and 
perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) by Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6. Environ Sci 
Technol 53 (19), 11410–11419. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.9b04047. 
[26] Huang, S., Sima, M., Long, Y., Messenger, C., Jaffe, P.R., 2022. Anaerobic 
degradation of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in biosolids by Acidimicrobium sp. 
strain A6. J Hazard Mater 424, 127699. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jhazmat.2021.127699. 
[27] Jin, X., Gong, S., Chen, Z., Xia, J., Xiang, W., 2021. Potential microalgal strains for 
converting flue gas CO2 into biomass. J Appl Phycol 33 (1), 47–55. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10811-020-02147-8. 
[28] Jing, Y., Campanaro, S., Kougias, P., Treu, L., Angelidaki, I., Zhang, S., et al., 2017. 
Anaerobic granular sludge for simultaneous biomethanation of synthetic 
wastewater and CO with focus on the identification of CO-converting 
microorganisms. Water Res 126, 19–28. 
[29] Johnson, G.R., Brusseau, M.L., Carroll, K.C., Tick, G.R., Duncan, C.M., 2022. Global 
distributions, source-type dependencies, and concentration ranges of per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances in groundwater. Sci Total Environ 841, 156602. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.156602. 
[30] Kim, B., Suidan, M., Wallington, T., Du, X., 2000. Biodegradability of 
trifluoroacetic acid. Environ Eng Sci 17 (6), 337–342. https://doi.org/10.1089/ 
ees.2000.17.337. 
[31] Li, B., Jing, F., Wu, D., Xiao, B., Hu, Z., 2021. Simultaneous removal of nitrogen 
and phosphorus by a novel aerobic denitrifying phosphorus-accumulating 
bacterium, Pseudomonas stutzeri ADP-19. Bioresour Technol 321, 124445. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2020.124445. 
[32] Li, Y., Oliver, D.P., Kookana, R.S., 2018. A critical analysis of published data to 
discern the role of soil and sediment properties in determining sorption of per and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs). Sci Total Environ 628, 110–120. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.envpol.2018.08.009. 
[33] Li, Y., Shi, X., Ling, Q., Li, S., Wei, J., Xin, M., et al., 2022. Bacterial extracellular 
polymeric substances: impact on soil microbial community composition and their 
potential role in heavy metal-contaminated soil. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 240, 
113701. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2022.113701. 
[34] Lim, X., 2021. Can microbes save us from PFAS? ACS Cent Sci 7 (1), 3–6. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acscentsci.1c00013. 
[35] Liou, J.S., Szostek, B., DeRito, C.M., Madsen, E.L., 2010. Investigating the 
biodegradability of perfluorooctanoic acid. Chemosphere 80 (2), 176–183. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2010.03.009. 
[36] Liu, G., Stewart, B.A., Yuan, K., Ling, S., Zhang, M., Wang, G., et al., 2021. 
Comprehensive adsorption behavior and mechanism of PFOA and PFCs in various 
subsurface systems in China. Sci Total Environ 794, 148463. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.148463. 
[37] Liu, H., Hu, W., Li, X., Hu, F., Liu, Y., Xie, T., et al., 2022. Effects of perfluoroalkyl 
substances on root and rhizosphere bacteria: phytotoxicity, phyto-microbial 
remediation, risk assessment. Chemosphere 289, 133137. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2021.133137. 
[38] Liu, R., Wei, X., Song, W., Wang, L., Cao, J., Wu, J., et al., 2022. Novel chloroflexi 
genomes from the deepest ocean reveal metabolic strategies for the adaptation to 
deep-sea habitats. Microbiome 10 (1), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-02201263-6. 
[39] Liu, W., Xu, S., Ma, H., Li, Y., Mąkinia, J., Zhai, J., 2023. Anaerobic consortia 
mediate Mn(IV)-dependent anaerobic oxidation of methane. Chem Eng J 468, 
143478. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2023.143478. 
[40] L¨offler, F.E., Sanford, R.A., Ritalahti, K.M., 2005. Enrichment, cultivation, and 
detection of reductively dechlorinating bacteria. Environ Microbiol 77–111. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0076-6879(05)97005-5. 
[41] Lücker, S., Wagner, M., Maixner, F., Pelletier, E., Koch, H., Vacherie, B., et al., 
2010. A nitrospira metagenome illuminates the physiology and evolution of 
globally important nitrite-oxidizing bacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci 107 (30), 
13479–13484. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1003860107. 
[42] McDonald, I.R., Bodrossy, L., Chen, Y., Murrell, J.C., 2008. Molecular ecology 
techniques for the study of aerobic methanotrophs. Appl Environ Microbiol 74 (5), 
1305–1315. https://doi.org/10.1128/Aem.02233-07. 
[43] Moody, C.A., Field, J.A., 1999. Determination of perfluorocarboxylates in 
groundwater impacted by fire-fighting activity. Environ Sci Technol 33 (16), 
2800–2806. https://doi.org/10.1021/es981355. 
[44] Mullin, L., Katz, D., Riddell, N., Plumb, R., Burgess, J.A., Yeung, L.W.Y., et al., 
2019. Analysis of hexafluoropropylene oxide-dimer acid (HFPO-DA) by liquid 
chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS): review of current approaches and 
environmental levels. Trends Anal Chem 118, 828–839. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
trac.2019.05.015. 
[45] NCBI, 2023. PubChem Compound Summary for CID 6422, Trifluoroacetic Acid. 
Retrieved June 17, 2023 from 〈https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Tri 
fluoroacetic-Acid〉. 
[46] Nelson, D.W., Sommer, L.E., 1982. Total carbon, organic carbon, and organic 
matter. In: Page, A.L. (Ed.), Methods of soil analysis. ASA-SSSA, Madison, 
pp. 539–579. 
[47] Nguyen, T.M.H., Braunig, J., Thompson, K., Thompson, J., Kabiri, S., Navarro, D. 
A., et al., 2020. Influences of chemical properties, soil properties, and solution pH 
on soil-water partitioning coefficients of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances 
(PFASs). Environ Sci Technol 54 (24), 15883–15892. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
est.0c05705. 
[48] OECD, 2021. Reconciling terminology of the universe of per-and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances: recommendations and practical guidance. OECD Paris, France.  
[49] Olvera-Vargas, H., Wang, Z., Xu, J., Lefebvre, O., 2022. Synergistic degradation of 
GenX (hexafluoropropylene oxide dimer acid) by pairing graphene-coated Ni-foam 
and boron doped diamond electrodes. Chem Eng J 430. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
cej.2021.132686. 
Z. Tang et al.

## Page 11

Journal of Hazardous Materials 465 (2024) 133217
11
[50] Park, H., Vecitis, C.D., Cheng, J., Choi, W., Mader, B.T., Hoffmann, M.R., 2009. 
Reductive defluorination of aqueous perfluorinated alkyl surfactants: effects of 
ionic headgroup and chain length. J Phys Chem A 113 (4), 690–696. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/jp807116q. 
[51] Parsons, J.R., Saez, M., Dolfing, J., de Voogt, P., 2008. Biodegradation of 
perfluorinated compounds. Rev Environ Contam Toxicol 196, 53–71. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/978-0-387-78444-1_2. 
[52] Pu, X., Han, Y., 2022. Promotion of carbon dioxide biofixation through metabolic 
and enzyme engineering. Catalysts 12 (4), 399. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
catal12040399. 
[53] Senevirathna, S., Krishna, K.C.B., Mahinroosta, R., Sathasivan, A., 2021. 
Comparative characterization of microbial communities that inhabit PFAS-rich 
contaminated sites: a case-control study. J Hazard Mater 423 (Pt A), 126941. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.126941. 
[54] Spain, A.M., Krumholz, L.R., Elshahed, M.S., 2009. Abundance, composition, 
diversity and novelty of soil proteobacteria. ISME J 3 (8), 992–1000. 
[55] Stockholm, 2022. PFASs listed under the Stockholm Convention. 〈http://chm.pops. 
int/Implementation/IndustrialPOPs/PFAS/Overview/tabid/5221/Default.aspx〉. 
[56] Tang, Z., Song, X., Xu, M., Yao, J., Ali, M., Wang, Q., et al., 2022. Effects of cooccurrence of PFASs and chlorinated aliphatic hydrocarbons on microbial 
communities in groundwater: a field study. J Hazard Mater 435. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jhazmat.2022.128969. 
[57] Trang, B., Li, Y., Xue, X.-S., Ateia, M., Houk, K., Dichtel, W.R., 2022. Lowtemperature mineralization of perfluorocarboxylic acids. Science 377 (6608), 
839–845. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abm8868. 
[58] USEPA, 2020. EPA PFAS Action Plan: Program Update. 
[59] Visscher, P.T., Culbertson, C.W., Oremland, R.S., 1994. Degradation of 
trifluoroacetate in oxic and anoxic sediments. Nature 369 (6483), 729–731. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/369729a0. 
[60] Wackett, L.P., 2021. Nothing lasts forever: understanding microbial 
biodegradation of polyfluorinated compounds and perfluorinated alkyl substances. 
Microb Biotechnol. https://doi.org/10.1111/1751-7915.13928. 
[61] Wackett, L.P., 2021. Why is the biodegradation of polyfluorinated compounds so 
rare? mSphere 6 (5), e0072121. https://doi.org/10.1128/mSphere.00721-21. 
[62] Wackett, L.P., 2022. Strategies for the biodegradation of polyfluorinated 
compounds. Microorganisms 10 (8), 1664. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
microorganisms10081664. 
[63] Walsh, C.T., 2020. Biologically generated carbon dioxide: nature’s versatile 
chemical strategies for carboxy lyases. Nat Prod Rep 37 (1), 100–135. https://doi. 
org/10.1039/C9NP00015A. 
[64] Wang, L., Yuan, L., Li, Z.-H., Zhang, X., Leung, K.M.Y., Sheng, G.-P., 2022. 
Extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) associated extracellular antibiotic 
resistance genes in activated sludge along the AAO process: distribution and 
microbial secretors. Sci Total Environ 816, 151575. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2021.151575. 
[65] Wang, Q., Song, X., Wei, C., Ding, D., Tang, Z., Tu, X., et al., 2021. Distribution, 
source identification and health risk assessment of PFASs in groundwater from 
Jiangxi Province, China. Chemosphere, 132946. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chemosphere.2021.132946. 
[66] Wang, Z., Buser, A.M., Cousins, I.T., Demattio, S., Drost, W., Johansson, O., et al., 
2021. A new OECD definition for per-and polyfluoroalkyl substances. Environ Sci 
Technol 55 (23), 15575–15578. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c06896. 
[67] Wei, C., Wang, Q., Song, X., Chen, X., Fan, R., Ding, D., et al., 2018. Distribution, 
source identification and health risk assessment of PFASs and two PFOS 
alternatives in groundwater from non-industrial areas. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 152, 
141–150. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2018.01.039. 
[68] Xiang, Q., Shan, G., Wu, W., Jin, H., Zhu, L., 2018. Measuring log Kow coefficients 
of neutral species of perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids using reversed-phase highperformance liquid chromatography. Environ Pollut 242 (Pt B), 1283–1290. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2018.08.009. 
[69] Xie, Y., Chen, G., May, A.L., Yan, J., Brown, L.P., Powers, J.B., et al., 2020. 
Pseudomonas sp. Strain 273 degrades fluorinated alkanes. Environ Sci Technol 54 
(23), 14994–15003. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.0c04029. 
[70] Xie, Y., May, A.L., Chen, G., Brown, L.P., Powers, J.B., Tague, E.D., et al., 2022. 
Pseudomonas sp. Strain 273 incorporates organofluorine into the lipid bilayer 
during growth with fluorinated alkanes. Environ Sci Technol. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.est.2c01454. 
[71] Xu, C., Song, X., Liu, Z., Ding, X., Chen, H., Ding, D., 2021. Occurrence, source 
apportionment, plant bioaccumulation and human exposure of legacy and 
emerging per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances in soil and plant leaves near a landfill 
in China. Sci Total Environ 776, 145731. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2021.145731. 
[72] Yu, H., Leadbetter, J.R., 2020. Bacterial chemolithoautotrophy via manganese 
oxidation. Nature 583 (7816), 453–458. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-0202468-5. 
[73] Yu, Y., Che, S., Ren, C., Jin, B., Tian, Z., Liu, J., et al., 2022. Microbial 
defluorination of unsaturated per- and polyfluorinated carboxylic acids under 
anaerobic and aerobic conditions: a structure specificity study. Environ Sci 
Technol. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c05509. 
[74] Yu, Y., Zhang, K., Li, Z., Ren, C., Chen, J., Lin, Y.H., et al., 2020. Microbial cleavage 
of C-F bonds in two C6 per- and polyfluorinated compounds via reductive 
defluorination. Environ Sci Technol 54 (22), 14393–14402. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.est.0c04483. 
[75] Zhang, Y., Liu, T., Li, M.M., Hua, Z.S., Evans, P., Qu, Y., et al., 2023. Hot spring 
distribution and survival mechanisms of thermophilic comammox Nitrospira. ISME 
J. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41396-023-01409-w. 
[76] Zhang, Y., Moores, A., Liu, J., Ghoshal, S., 2019. New insights into the degradation 
mechanism of perfluorooctanoic acid by persulfate from density functional theory 
and experimental data. Environ Sci Technol 53 (15), 8672–8681. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.est.9b00797. 
[77] Zhang, Z., Sarkar, D., Biswas, J.K., Datta, R., 2022. Biodegradation of per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS): a review. Bioresour Technol 344 (Pt B), 
126223. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2021.126223. 
[78] Zhou, L., Han, P., Zhao, M., Yu, Y., Sun, D., Hou, L., et al., 2021. Biotransformation 
of lincomycin and fluoroquinolone antibiotics by the ammonia oxidizers AOA, AOB 
and comammox: a comparison of removal, pathways, and mechanisms. Water Res 
196, 117003. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2021.117003. 
Z. Tang et al.

