# 1-s2.0-S0304389425027992-main

**Source PDF**: 1-s2.0-S0304389425027992-main.pdf

---

## Page 1

First evidence of aerobic microbial degradation of HFPO-DA in soils 
adjacent to fluorochemical plant: Degradation pathways, and potential 
functional genes and hosts
Ziao Xing a, Guoguang Wang a,*
, Shuaihao Liu a, Hongyi Xue a, Yana Wang a,  
Guangzhi Rong a
, Haixia Wang b, Yu Liu a
a College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Dalian Maritime University, No.1 Linghai Road, Dalian 116026, PR China
b Navigation College, Dalian Maritime University, No.1 Linghai Road, Dalian 116026, PR China
H I G H L I G H T S
G R A P H I C A L  A B S T R A C T
• Microbial degradation was first reported 
for HFPO-DA in aerobic soils.
• 3 degradation products were screened 
via nontarget analysis in UPLC-Q Exac­
tive-HRMS.
• Defluorination, hydroxyl oxidation and 
C-C cleavage were main degradation 
pathways.
• 19 potential functional genes were 
associated with microbial degradation 
of HFPO-DA.
• Gordonia, Megasphaera, and Streptomyces 
were potential degradation genera of 
HFPO-DA.
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Hexafluoropropylene oxide-dimer acid
Microbial degradation
Degradation pathways
Functional genes
Functional hosts
A B S T R A C T
Hexafluoropropylene oxide (HFPO) oligomers used as the novel alternative of perfluorooctanoic acid have 
gained global concern due to their widespread presence and potential toxic effects. However, the microbial 
degradation behaviors of HFPO oligomers remain unknown. This study provided first evidence of microbial 
degradation of an important HFPO oligomer, HFPO-dimer acid (HFPO-DA), in aerobic soils affected by sewage of 
fluorochemical plant. Our findings disclosed that 51.6 ± 3.0 % of initial HFPO-DA was degraded by indigenous 
microbes during the 150 days. A total of 3 degradation products were screened via nontarget analysis due to 
multiple degradation pathways, including defluorination, hydroxyl oxidation, hydrolysis and C-C bond cleavage. 
2-trifluoromethyl-2-(difluoromethoxy) acetic acid was first found as the transformation product of HFPO-DA. 
Additionally, 19 potential functional genes associated with transmembrane transport, xenobiotic biodegrada­
tion and energy metabolism played important roles in HFPO-DA degradation. Genus Gordonia, Megasphaera, and 
Streptomyces, as hosts of potential functional genes, were found as the potential keystone taxa in HFPO-DA 
degradation. The findings of this study break the traditional cognition that HFPO-DA was recalcitrant to 
* Correspondence to: College of Environmental Science and Technology, Dalian Maritime University, No.1 Linghai Road, Dalian 116026, PR China.
E-mail address: guoguangwang@dlmu.edu.cn (G. Wang). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Hazardous Materials
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jhazmat
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2025.139880
Received 22 June 2025; Received in revised form 12 September 2025; Accepted 14 September 2025  
Journal of Hazardous Materials 498 (2025) 139880 
Available online 15 September 2025 
0304-3894/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

## Page 2

microbial degradation, and have important implications toward bioremediation of contaminated sites and 
implementation of the Action Plan on Controlling New Pollutants in China.
1. Introduction
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) are a class of man-made 
fluorinated compounds with the excellent stability and surface proper­
ties, and thus have been mass-produced and widely used in various in­
dustrial, agricultural and commercial fields since the 1950s [1]. 
Extensive concerns over their ubiquity, high persistence and detrimental 
effects have led to the phase-out of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and 
perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) by the Environmental Protection 
Agency of United States. Meanwhile, the production and usage of 
long-chain perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids (PFCAs, C ≥8) and per­
fluoroalkyl sulfonic acids (PFSAs, C ≥7) have also been strictly regu­
lated in the global market [2]. However, the massive global market 
demand for PFASs drives the manufacturers to produce alternatives and 
novel fluorinated compounds to compensate these restricted legacy 
PFASs. Hexafluoropropylene oxide (HFPO) oligomers, with the ether 
bond in carbon chain, have been reported as the important processing 
aids in synthesis of fluorinated products to replace PFOA, and shown the 
increasing global consumptions [3]. HFPO-dimer acid (HFPO-DA) and 
trimer acid (HFPO-TA) are the two major HFPO oligomers, with the 
wide production and application in the global market [4].
Owing to no chemical bonds with products, HFPO oligomers can be 
released into the environment during the production, usage and 
dismantling processes of HFPO-containing products. Subsequently, 
HFPO oligomers were widely detected in various environmental 
matrices, which caused the emerging environmental concerns [5,6]. Soil 
is regarded as one of the major reservoirs of HFPO oligomers, and can 
also become the HFPO sources for the soil-growing plants [6,7]. For 
instance, the high concentrations of HFPO-DA were detected in the soils 
adjacent to a fluorochemical industrial park in China, with the levels up 
to dozens of μg/kg, indicating the severe contamination of HFPO-DA 
around the pollutant sources [7]. Recently, Wang et al. reported the 
HFPO occurrences in the soils from 31 provinces across China, and 
HFPO-DA was detected in 70.2 % of soils, indicating the widespread 
HFPO-contamination in soils [8]. In addition, HFPO oligomers were 
disclosed to accumulate in crops via root uptake from the soils, which 
might transfer to human bodies along the food chain [6]. Although 
HFPO oligomers are initially anticipated to be the environment-friend 
replacement of PFOA, the increasing studies indicated that the persis­
tence, bioaccumulation and toxicity of HFPO oligomers were similar to 
those of PFOA [9]. Hence, it is imperative to investigate the environ­
mental behaviors and fates of HFPO oligomers in the soils, which is 
essential for the implementation plan of Controlling New pollutants in 
China.
To date, there are limited studies on transformations of HFPO olig­
omers, despite of the increasing shares of HFPO oligomers on the global 
market. HFPO-DA was reported to be completely degraded via the 
reductive processes in the UV/sulfite system during the 120 min, and the 
short-chain pentafluoropropionic acid (PFPrA) and trifluoroacetic acid 
(TFA) were the terminal transformation products [10]. Meanwhile, 
HFPO-DA can also be oxidated to generate CO2, PFPrA, and TFA by the 
advanced oxidation processes of activated persulfate in the aqueous 
solution, which was triggered via electron transfer reaction of SO4
•- 
radicals [11]. In addition, the decarboxylation reaction of HFPO-DA was 
also observed in the DMSO/H2O system in the low temperature of 40℃, 
and further underwent hydroxylation and hydrolysis to form short chain 
PFCAs [12]. However, the limited studies of microbial degradation 
showed the refractoriness of HFPO oligomers. Recently, Tang et al. re­
ported the anaerobic microbial degradation of HFPO-DA in the soils, and 
5.45 % of HDPO-DA was degraded during the 10 months [13]. Jin et al. 
reported that HFPO-DA could not be degraded in the aerobic sludge 
during the incubation of 15 days [14]. The controversial results between 
anaerobic and aerobic microbial degradations are mainly derived from 
the short period of aerobic incubation, and the fact of aerobic microbial 
degradation may be concealed for HFPO-DA. Thus, there are consider­
able knowledge gaps associated with the aerobic microbial degradation 
of HFPO oligomers in the environmental, which hamper the bioreme­
diation of HFPO oligomers in the contaminated sites.
Herein, we comprehensively explored the aerobic microbial degra­
dation of HFPO-DA by the indigenous microbes in the soils during the 
long-period incubation of 150 days. HFPO-DA, the widespread congener 
detected in the soils, was selected as the target. The aims of this study 
were to (1) evaluate the degradation potential of HFPO-DA by the 
indigenous aerobic microbes in the soils; (2) screen the unknown 
degradation products via nontarget identification, and disclose the po­
tential degradation pathways; (3) characterize the dynamic changes of 
microbial community structures in response to HFPO-DA; (4) explore 
the responsible functional genes and microorganisms to enhance the 
understanding of HFPO-DA degradation. The findings of this study 
provided insights into the microbial degradation processes of HFPO-DA 
in the aerobic soils, and informed the development of HFPO-DA biore­
mediation strategies.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Soil microcosm setup and incubation experiment
The soil samples were collected from the agricultural lands adjacent 
to a large fluorochemical industrial park (Fuxin, Liaoning Province, 
China) in July 2023 (Table S1), in which the fluoropolymer manufac­
tures are produced by using HFPO-DA as processing aids. The soil 
microcosm was constructed via the addition of 10 g of homogenized 
soils in a 150 mL Quickfit conical flask. Prior to degradation experiment, 
soil in the flask was initially incubated under the aerobic condition for 
14 days to active the indigenous microorganisms. The chemicals and 
reagents were given in details in Text S1. Four treatments were included 
in the microcosms: (1) the live spiked treatments (activated soils spiked 
with HFPO-DA), (2) sterilized control treatment (sterilized soils spiked 
with HFPO-DA), (3) matrix control treatments (activated soils without 
HFPO-DA addition), and (4) methanol control treatments (activated 
soils with methanol similar to amount of live spiked treatments). In the 
live spiked treatment, 10 μL of HFPO-DA stock solution in methanol 
(800 μg/mL) was added into the soil to construct the HFPO-DA spiked 
treatment, and the initially spiked concentration of HFPO-DA was 
detected to 0.74 μg/g. Subsequently, the soils were thoroughly shaken to 
obtain the homogenous mixture with HFPO-DA, and put into the fume 
cupboard to evaporate methanol. In order to verify homogeneous 
mixture of HFPO-DA in the spiked soils, 2 g of soil were randomly 
collected from the 10 g of spiked soils, and the sample collection was 
repeated for three times. The concentration of HFPO-DA in the collected 
soils showed good consistency with the relative differences ≤5 %, 
suggesting the homogenization of HFPO-DA in the spiked soils. To 
monitor the abiotic influence, the sterilized control treatments were 
prepared and incubated with the same ways as described above, except 
that the soils were autoclaved at 121℃ for 3 h and repeated for three 
times, and then added with HgCl2 and NaN3 to inhibit the activities of 
microorganisms during the incubation time. The matrix control treat­
ments were conducted to monitor background PFASs and potential 
transformations of background PFASs. In the methanol control treat­
ments, the amount of methanol (10 μL) similar to the live spiked treat­
ment was added into the soils to evaluate the influence of methanol on 
microbial community of soils. It was reported that the effect of methanol 
Z. Xing et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Hazardous Materials 498 (2025) 139880 
2

## Page 3

on microbial organisms could be neglected during the aerobic microbial 
degradation of PFASs in the soils [15]. All of the flasks were wrapped by 
aluminum foils and incubated in dark environment at 25℃, during 
which the prepared soils maintained the 60 % of water hold capacity.
2.2. Sample preparation for analysis of HFPO-DA and its Products
The sample extraction and purification procedures of HFPO-DA from 
the soils were based on the method reported in our previous study [16], 
with a minor modification. Briefly, the freeze-dried and homogenized 
soils were extracted by the NH4OH-methanol solution (0.1 %, w:w), and 
purified by the Oasis Wax column (Waters, USA), with the details in Text 
S2.
The quantitative analysis of HFPO-DA was performed by the ultra­
performance liquid chromatography coupled with triple-quadrupole 
mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS, TSQ Quantis, Thermo Fisher Scien­
tific, 
Germany). 
A 
Hypersil 
GOLD 
C18 
column 
(1.7 
μm, 
2.1 mm×100 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for separation of 
analytes, and the mobile phases were methanol (A) and water contain­
ing 5 mM ammonium acetate (B). Details on the instrumental parame­
ters were given in Table S2 and S3. The nontarget screening of HFPO-DA 
degradation products was conducted on an ultrahigh-performance 
liquid chromatography coupled with a high-resolution Q Exactive 
mass spectrometer (UPLC-Q Exactive-HRMS, Thermo Fisher Scientific, 
Germany), operating in both negative and positive electrospray ioniza­
tion modes. Degradation products were separated by using a Waters 
Atlantis T3 column (3.0 μm, 100 mm ×3.0 mm). Details on the nontarget 
analysis were provided in Table S3. Compound Discoverer 3.3 (CD 3.3, 
Thermo Fisher Scientific) was applied to process the raw data to obtain 
feature-based data, and the workflow for the identification of potential 
degradation products was given in details in Text S3. TFA and PFPrA 
were quantified by UPLC-MS/MS (TSQ Quantis, Thermo Fisher Scien­
tific, Germany)), with instrument parameters and MS2 of parent and 
product ions in Table S2 and Table S4. In addition, the measurement of 
F- in the soils were provided in details in Text S4, and the quality 
assurance and quality control were given in details in Text S5.
2.3. Extraction of genome DNA and metagenomic sequencing
To gain insights into the potential functional genes and microor­
ganisms responsible for HFPO-DA degradation in the aerobic soils, the 
soil samples at day 0, 60, 90 and 150 were collected from the nonsterilized treatments for metagenomic analysis. Details on extraction 
of genome DNA and metagenomic sequencing were provided in Text S6.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Aerobic microbial degradation kinetic of HFPO-DA
During the period of 150-day incubation, there were no significant 
changes in HFPO-DA concentrations in the sterilized controls, with the 
residual percentages fluctuating at 98–117 % (Fig. 1a, blue line). 
However, approximate 51.6 ± 3.0 % of the initial addition dose of 
HFPO-DA was degraded after 150 days in the live soils with the indig­
enous microorganisms (Fig. 1a, red line). This result implicated that the 
loss of HFPO-DA in the soils was attributed to the microbial activities, 
and HFPO-DA could be degraded by the aerobic microorganisms. In 
addition, it was interesting that there were no variations of HFPO-DA 
concentrations during the first 30 days in live soil, which was also 
observed for microbial degradation of HFPO-DA in aerobic sludge dur­
ing the incubation period of 15 days [14]. It was documented that when 
microbial communities were confronted with environmental stress, their 
growth entered a lag phase, during which the microorganisms regulated 
the expressions of genes and enzymes to adapt the changed environment 
[17]. Thus, the lag degradation of HFPO-DA at first 30 days might 
derived from the adaption of indigenously aerobic microorganisms to 
HFPO-DA stress in the soils. After that, HFPO-DA showed the rapid 
degradation, and decreased to 48.4 ± 1.6 % at day 150 (Fig. 1a, red 
line). These results were striking, and broke the traditional perception 
that HFPO-DA was hardly degraded by the aerobic microbes in the field 
environment.
In order to deepen understanding the degradation, the aerobic mi­
crobial degradation of HFPO-DA followed pseudo-first-order kinetic (r2 
= 0.95), and the degradation rate was calculated as −0.0052 
± 0.0005 day−1 (Fig. S1). The half-life (t1/2) of HFPO-DA were deter­
mined to be 134.8 ± 18.7 days in the aerobic soils. In order to get insight 
into persistence of HFPO-DA in the environment, the microbial degra­
dation of HFPO-DA was compared to PFOA (predecessor of HFPO-DA) 
and other emerging alternatives of legacy PFASs. This degradation 
rate of HFPO-DA was much slower than those of other emerging PFE­
CAs, such as 3-(trifluoromethoxy) propanoic acid (t1/2 < 2 days), 2- 
(2,2,2-trifluoroethoxy) acetic acid (t1/2 <
4 days) and 2-(per­
fluoroethoxy) acetic acid (t1/2 < 20 days) [14], and also slower than 
other emerging PFASs, such as 6:2 fluorotelomer sulfonate (t1/2 < 30 
days) [18] and 8:2 fluorotelomer alcohol (t1/2 < 4 days) [19], but 
comparable to that reported for PFOA (50 % decrease for 100 days) 
[20]. These results indicated that HFPO-DA was very refractory to 
dissipation in the environment, and may be not the beneficial substi­
tution of PFOA in the perspective of persistence.
3.2. Aerobic microbial degradation products and pathways of HFPO-DA
Three transformation products of HFPO-DA were identified though 
nontargeted screening using UPLC - Q Exactive HRMS (Table 1). These 
products were not detected in the background soils (Table S5) and 
matrix controls (Fig. S3), which eliminated the interference of 
Fig. 1. Temporal changes in residual proportions of HFPO-DA (a) and molar 
ratio/peak area of transformation products (PFPrA, TFA and TP193) (b) during 
the incubation of 150 days in aerobic soil.
Z. Xing et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Hazardous Materials 498 (2025) 139880 
3

## Page 4

background soils and HFPO-DA stock solution on the validation of 
transformation products. Meanwhile, the three transformation products 
were also not detected in the sterilized soils (Fig. S2), which further 
indicated the microbial degradation of HFPO-DA in the aerobic soils. For 
structural confirmation, the chromatograms and MS2 spectra of HFPODA and TP193 were given in details in Fig. S5 and S6. MS2 spectra of 
HFPO-DA were used to avoid false positive for confirmation of degra­
dation products. In addition, two of transformation products (PFPrA and 
TFA) were verified by the authentic standards. Overall, the reactions of 
defluorination, decarboxylation, hydroxyl oxidation, hydrolysis and C-C 
bond cleavage were involved into the aerobic microbial degradation of 
HFPO-DA in soils, and thus the tentative degradation pathways were 
speculated in Fig. 2.
Defluorination was recognized as one of the important degradation 
pathways of PFASs during the microbial degradation [21,22]. In the 
present study, the predicated molecular structure of TP193 was 
CHF2OCHCF3COOH 
(2-trifluoromethyl-2-(difluoromethoxy) 
acetic 
acid) (Fig. S6), which was generated from HFPO-DA transformation via 
the elimination of fluoroalkyl (-CF3 and -CF2) and defluorination 
(Fig. 2). TP193 was firstly detected at day 30, and its peak area showed 
the first increasing and then decreasing trend with the peak at day 60, 
suggesting the further transformation of TP 193 (Fig. 1b). Meanwhile, 
compared with the sterilized soil, the gradual increase in the concen­
trations of F- in live soil along with the incubation time also verified the 
occurrence of defluorination, and the defluorination degree was 15.9 
± 1.8 % (Fig. S4). This detected defluorinated product broke the tradi­
tional view that defluorination hardly occurred for the microbial 
degradation of HFPO-DA. It was previously reported that Acidimicrobium 
sp. strain A6 could transform PFOA via releasing fluoride ions [20]. As 
the alternative of PFOA, HFPO-DA might share the similar defluorinated 
pathways. As for C-C bond cleavage for HFPO-DA, this similar degra­
dation pathway was also observed for other fluorinated compounds [23, 
24], which might be attributed to the preferential utilization of 
short-chain compounds as carbon source by microorganisms. Subse­
quently, TP193 may undergo a multi-step oxidation to form an alcohol 
intermediate product and TFA (Fig. 2). It was documented that the 
alcohol products occurred the spontaneous defluorination during the 
aerobic microbial degradation of other PFECAs, such as 2-(tri­
fluoromethoxy) acetic acid (C3H3F3O3) and 2-(perfluoroethoxy) acetic 
acid (C4H3F5O3) [14], and were finally oxidated into carboxylic acid. 
TFA and PFPrA were assigned as ultrashort-chain PFCAs (C ≤3), which 
was verified and quantified by the authentic standards in the present 
study (Fig. 1b). As shown in Fig. 2, TFA was generated from TP 193 via 
the multi-step oxidation. HFPO-DA might undergo the cleavage of ether 
bond, and generate PFPrA via hydrolysis. It is documented that PFPrA 
could be transformed to generate TFA via the C-C bond cleavage [10]. 
The decrease of PFPrA from day 90 also indicated the further trans­
formation of PFPrA into other products (Fig. 1b). Thus, TFA might be 
derived from the further transformation of TP193 and/or C-C bond 
cleavage of PFPrA during the aerobic microbial degradation of 
HFPO-DA. Correspondingly, the first detection of TFA lagged behind TP 
193 and PFPrA, and then TFA showed the continuous increasing 
(Fig. 1b). Numerous studies reported that TFA was end degradation 
products of many PFASs, and its concentrations were orders of magni­
tude higher than those of other PFAS [25–27]. In addition, the repro­
duction and liver toxicities to organisms were also reported for TFA [27, 
28]. Recently, H. Arp et al. called for “The Global Threat from the 
Irreversible Accumulation of Trifluoroacetic Acid (TFA) ” [27]. At day 
150, the total molar ratio of PFPrA and TFA to initial HFPO-DA dose was 
30.4 % (Fig. 1b). Coupled with the degradation degree of 51.6 % for 
HFPO-DA after the 150 days of incubation (Fig. 1a), the molar ratio of 
TP193 to initial HFPO-DA dose was calculated to be about 21.2 % under 
the condition of no other products except for these three degradation 
products. Thus, we speculated that the maximum contribution potential 
of TP193 to HFPO-DA loss might be 41.1 % in the soils after the 150 days 
of incubation, which should be further verified by the chemical synthesis 
Table 1 
Identified degradation products of HFPO-DA by UPLC-Q Exactive-HRMS.
Acronym
Formula
m/z
Error(ppm)
Confidence level
Theoretical
Observed
HFPO-DA
C6F11O3H
328.96773
328.96770
0.09
1a
PFPrA
C3F5O2H
162.98163
162.98193
−1.55
1a
TFA
C2F3O2H
112.98397
112.98429
−2.83
1a
TP193 
(2-trifluoromethyl−2-(difluoromethoxy) acetic acid)
C4F5O3H3
192.99229
192.99361
−6.83
3a
Fig. 2. Proposed microbial degradation pathways of HFPO-DA in aerobic soils. Chemicals in the blue and green boxes are detected products in the present study, and 
were quantified by the semi-quantitative and quantitative analyses, respectively. Chemicals in the dotted brackets were potential intermediates.
Z. Xing et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Hazardous Materials 498 (2025) 139880 
4

## Page 5

of TP193 in the future studies.
3.3. Microbial community compositions
In order to explore the influence of HFPO-DA on microbial com­
munities, the relative abundances and compositions of microorganisms 
were investigated in the soils (Fig. 3). During the 150-day exposure 
period, the microbial community compositions in the methanol control 
treatments showed no detectable discrepancies compared to the matrix 
control treatments, indicating that the influence of methanol on mi­
crobial community could be neglected. After exposure to HFPO-DA, at 
the phylum level, Actinomycetota was the predominant phylum, and its 
abundances significantly increased 1.1 times during the incubation of 
150 days (p＜0.05, Fig. S7), indicating that Actinomycetota could 
maintain self-growth under the stress of HFPO-DA and its associated 
degradation products (Fig. 3a). This result was consistent with the 
previous reports that Actinomycetota was widely detected in the soils 
contaminated with PFASs [29]. Meanwhile, some species from Actino­
mycetota were documented as the degraders of PFASs, such as Rhodo­
coccus jostii RHA1, Gordonia sp. NB4–1Y, Dietzia aurantiaca J3 as the 
effective degraders of 6:2 FTSA [30]. Recently, Actinomycetota was also 
found to be associated with the microbial degradation of 6:2 FTSA in the 
aerobic sludge [18]. In addition, Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6, belonging 
to Actinomycetota, was reported to effectively degrade PFOA [20]. These 
consistence results further implied that Actinomycetota might play the 
important role in the microbial degradation of HFPO-DA in the aerobic 
soils. Another phylum, Bacillota, Euryarchaeota and Cyanobacteria were 
also observed with the increase in the abundances in the soils spiked 
with HFPO-DA during the incubation (Fig. 3a). Bacillota exhibited a 
significant enrichment after exposure to HFPO-DA at day 60 (p＜0.05, 
Fig. S7), which was observed during the aerobic biotransformation of 
6:2 fluorotelomer sulfonate in soils from two aqueous film-forming foam 
(AFFF)-impacted sites [29]. Euryarchaeota was known to be tolerant to 
high-dose 8:2 FTOH exposure in the soils, and also participated in the 
microbial degradation of 8:2 FTOH [19]. In addition, a recent study 
found that Cyanobacteria had evolved several detoxification mechanisms 
to degrade organic pollutants via a series of enzymes, such as mono­
oxygenase, dioxygenase, hydroxylase, carboxylase and decarboxylase 
[31]. This phylum may involving the initial biodegradation of 
HFPO-DA, due to the enrichment at day 60. Overall, coupled with the 
previous studies, Actinomycetota, Bacillota, Euryarchaeota and Cyano­
bacteria were the important phyla highly associated with aerobic mi­
crobial degradation of HFPO-DA in the soils.
At genus level, Nocardioides, belonging to phylum Actinomycetota, 
was the predominant genus, and its abundance significantly increased 
15.3 % from day 90 to day 150 (p < 0.05, Fig. S8). A previous study 
reported that Nocardioides exhibited the significant capacity to degrade 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) to form diols during the aer­
obic microbial degradation [32]. In addition, the abundances of Strep­
tomyces and Microbacterium, belonging to phylum Actinomycetota, 
increased 4 % and 17.5 % in the soils spiked with HFPO-DA (Fig. S8), 
respectively. The previous study reported Streptomyces could catalyze 
naphthalene into benzoic acid, and Microbacterium could be involved in 
oxidation degradation of naphthalene and di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate to 
split benzene ring catalyzed by dioxygenase and monooxygenase [33, 
34]. Meanwhile, Microbacterium was capable of transforming phthalic 
acid via the successive decarboxylation and hydroxylation [33]. It is 
worthy to note that, despite the low increase in the abundance (1.15 %) 
of Rhodococcus (belonging to phylum Actinomycetota), this genus was 
verified to degrade 6:2 FTS and 6:2 FTOH in the soils [35,36]. These 
results provided the key information on potential role of genus Nocar­
dioides, Streptomyces, Microbacterium and Rhodococcus in the aerobic 
microbial degradation of HFPO-DA, and further studies are warranted to 
verify the degradation capacities of these genera via the isolation from 
the soils.
3.4. Identification of potential functional genes and hosts
Potential Functional Genes. Metagenomics analysis was used to iden­
tify the potential functional genes associated with aerobic microbial 
degradation 
of 
HFPO-DA. 
Monooxygenase, 
dehalogenase, 
de­
hydrogenases and hydrolases were reported to be directly involved in 
the microbial degradation of PFASs, such as splitting of ether bond, 
defluorination, elimination of fluoroalkyl and cleavage of C-C bonds 
[14,37]. Meanwhile, the transmembrane transport, energy metabolism, 
and signal transduction had also been demonstrated to play the impor­
tant roles on the degradation of halogenated compounds [37–39]. In 
order to comprehensively screen the potential functional genes, a total 
of 19 genes associated with transmembrane transport, xenobiotics 
degradation and energy metabolism were analyzed for the microbial 
degradation of HFPO-DA in aerobic soils (Fig. 4a).
Transmembrane transport of compounds into the cells was an 
important step prior to their biodegradation with the related intracel­
lular enzymes within the microorganisms [40]. Thus, the genes regu­
lating the transmembrane transport of compounds was investigated in 
the soils during the microbial degradation of HFPO-DA. An enrichment 
in the genes associated with ABC-2 type transport system ATP-binding 
protein (ABC-2. A, K01990) and ABC-2 type transport system 
permease protein (ABC-2. P, K01992) were observed during the incu­
bation (Fig. 4a). It was documented that organic pollutants could be 
transported across membranes into microbial cells via the ABC trans­
porters, and then degraded by the intracellular enzymes [38]. Overall, 
these results indicated that K10990 and K10992 were also the important 
genes regulating the transmembrane transport for the aerobic microbial 
degradation of HFPO-DA in the soils.
Oxidoreduction was widely reported as the key reaction step for the 
aerobic microbial degradation of emerging PFASs, such as fluo­
roalkylether substances, fluorotelomer sulfonic acid, sulfonamide amine 
oxide, and sulfonamide alkylbetaine [14,18]. As shown in Fig. 4a, the 
genes pmoA (K10944), pmoB (K10945) and pmoC (K10946) encoding 
monooxygenase were significantly upregulated (p＜0.05) after the 
exposure to HFPO-DA in the soils. Genes CYP199A2 (K22553) encoding 
Fig. 3. Microbial community compositions and relative abundances at phylum 
level (a) and genus level (b) in soil after exposure to HFPO-DA.
Z. Xing et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Hazardous Materials 498 (2025) 139880 
5

## Page 6

4-methoxybenzoate monooxygenase showed the significant increase (p 
＜0.05) after exposure to HFPO-DA in the soils (Fig. 4a). It was docu­
mented that 4-methoxybenzoate monooxygenase participated in the 
O-demethylation of benzoate during microbial degradation [41]. 
Meanwhile, monooxygenase was reported to be involved into the ether 
bond splitting of fluoroalkylether substances (ether PFASs) during the 
microbial degradation [14]. Coupled with the products from the 
oxidation and cleavage of ether bond (Fig. 2), pmoA, pmoB, pmoC and 
CYP199A2 were regarded as the potential functional genes encoding 
monooxygenase in HFPO-DA biotransformation. Gene catE (K07104) 
encoding catechol 2,3-dioxygenase also showed the enrichment after the 
exposure to HFPO-DA in the soils (Fig. 4a). Gene catE (K07104) was 
reported to be involved in the oxidization of alcohol into formate and 
dienolate during the biodegradation of aromatic compounds (Fig. S9) 
[42], which may corresponded to the formation of TFA/PFPrA (Fig. 2). 
Thus, it is speculated that catE was also the potential functional genes for 
microbial degradation of HFPO-DA. Dehydrogenase was documented as 
one kind of key enzymes participating in the redox degradation of PFASs 
[37]. As shown in Fig. 4a, these genes of paaH(K00074), gcdH (K00252), 
ALDH (K00128) and frdA (K00244) encoding dehydrogenase were sig­
nificant upregulated (p < 0.05) after exposure to HFPO-DA in the soils. 
paaH (K00074) encoding 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase was 
reported to participate in the oxidation of hydroxy acid to dicarboxylic 
acids during the microbial degradation of benzoic acid [43]. ALDH 
(K00128) encoding aldehyde dehydrogenase (NAD+) could effectively 
oxidize aldehydes to carboxylic acids, and had been shown to degrade 
halogenated pollutants, such as chlorophenols, and fipronil [44,45]. 
Thus, ALDH (K00128) was an important gene associated with the for­
mation of short-chain PFASs (TFA and PFPrA) from HFPO-DA during the 
aerobic microbial degradation. Glutaryl-CoA, an electron-transfer 
flavoprotein 2,3-oxidoreductase, was encoded by gcdH (K00252), and 
could promote the decarboxylation and release CO2. This enzyme might 
involve into the decarboxylation to form intermediate (Fig. 2). In 
addition, the genes encoding dehalogenase were also predicated for the 
defluorination of HFPO-DA (Fig. 4a). Based on the previous studies, 
dehH (K01561) encoding haloacetate dehalogenase, 2-HAD (K01560) 
encoding for 2-haloacid dehalogenase, and dhaA (K01563) encoding 
haloalkane dehalogenase could participate in the defluorination and 
metabolic alkane degradation [46]. Recently, dehH (K01561), 2-HAD 
(K01560) and dhaA (K01563) were identified as the functional genes for 
the defluorination of fluorotelomer sulfonic acids and fluorotelomer 
alcohols [46]. Accompanied by the enrichment of fluoride ion (Fig. S4) 
and generation of defluorinated products (Fig. 2), the high abundances 
of these dehalogenation genes should result into the defluorination of 
HFPO-DA during the microbial degradation (Fig. 4a). Enzymes involved 
in the hydrolysis and hydroxylation were also explored for the microbial 
degradation of HFPO-DA. Specifically, chnC (K14731) encoding 
epsilon-lactone hydrolase and mphA (K05712) encoding 3-(3-hydrox­
y-phenyl) propionate hydroxylase were significantly upregulated 
(p < 0.05) during the microbial degradation of HFPO-DA (Fig. 4a). 
These results indicated that the potential roles of genes chnC and mphA 
in the hydrolyzation and hydroxylation during the microbial degrada­
tion of HFPO-DA in aerobic soils, which need the further verifications in 
the future studies.
Energy is essential for the microbial degradation of organic pollut­
ants, which is mainly provided by the energy metabolism in the mi­
croorganisms. A serious of genes associated with energy metabolism, 
including AtpE (K03887), nuoM (K00342), nuoF (K00335), nuoA 
(K00330) and nuoB (K00331), were all upregulated during the microbial 
degradation of HFPO-DA (Fig. 4a). Based on the KEGG enrichment 
analysis, these genes were mainly assigned to the oxidative phosphor­
ylation pathway (Fig. S10), which could release large amounts of ATP as 
the energy source for microbial degradation of HFPO-DA. Recently, it 
was found that natural microorganisms could enhance the degradation 
of fluorides via regulating phosphatases for energy generation, which 
reduced the toxicity to cells [40]. Thus, AtpE, nuoM, nuoF, and nuoA 
were inferred as the important functional genes, which was associated 
with the energy supply to drive the microbial degradation of HFPO-DA.
Host of Potential Functional Gene. The hosts responsible for the mi­
crobial degradation of HFPO-DA were investigated by linking the 
functional genes discussed above to the microorganisms. At the genus 
level, a total of 37 hosts harboring these functional genes associated 
with HFPO-DA degradation were screened (Fig. 4b). Among them, 21 
functional genes hosts were identified in phylum Actinomycetota, which 
was consistent with the microbial community analysis, further verifying 
the important role of Actinomycetota in the microbial degradation of 
HFPO-DA. The rest hosts belonged to phylum Bacillota, Myxococcota, 
Planctomycetota, Acidobacteriota and Thermodesulfobacteriota, and 
Pseudomonadota.
In order to get insights into the microbial degradation of HFPO-DA, 
the hosts with increase in the abundances were analyzed in the following 
discussions. For phylum Actinomycetota, genus Streptomyces harbored 
the energy metabolism genes (K00330 and K00331), haloacetate 
dehalogenase gene (K01561), epsilon-lactone hydrolase (K14731), 3hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase gene (K00074), and sulfonate 
transport system permease protein gene (K15554), and its abundance 
increased by 1.08 times after exposure to HFPO-DA for 60 days and 1.12 
times for 150 days (Fig. 4b). This genus had been reported to degrade 
organochlorinated pesticides [47,48]. Meanwhile, K01561 could 
initiate the defluorination, and genus Streptomyces might participate in 
the defluorination of HFPO-DA. The genus Gordonia was predicted to 
possess the electron-transfer flavoprotein 2,3-oxidoreductase gene 
(K00252), which was reported to be associated with the oxidation of 6:2 
FTSA in the aerobic sludge [18]. This result implied that genus Gordonia 
was the potential oxidative degrader of HFPO-DA. For phylum Myx­
ococcota, genus Anaeromyxobacter carried the energy metabolism gene 
(K00331). Genus Anaeromyxobacter were reported to involve in the 
Fig. 4. Heatmap profiles showing relative abundances of potential functional 
genes (a) and related hosts at genus level (b) in the soils during HFPO-DA 
degradation.
Z. Xing et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Hazardous Materials 498 (2025) 139880 
6

## Page 7

reductive dehalogenation of 2-chlorophenol, and energy supply was 
important for the reductive dehalogenation [49]. In phylum Thermode­
sulfobacteriota, genus Geotalea also possessed the energy metabolism 
gene (K00330), which was previously reported to catalyze the methyl­
ation of benzene [50]. Genus Megasphaera (phylum Bacillota) and 
Thermoflexus (phylum Chloroflexota) were the hosts of aldehyde dehy­
drogenase gene (K00128) and 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase 
gene (K00074), respectively, which both initiated the oxidation. 
Although no studies have reported their roles in xenobiotic degradation, 
the functional genes reveled that genus Megasphaera and Thermoflexus 
might participate in the oxidation of HFPO-DA, which need further 
studies to verify. Overall, these results provided the key information that 
these potential hosts were possible contributors of the microbial 
degradation of HFPO-DA in the aerobic soils.
3.5. Microbial co-occurrence network
In order to deepen understanding the interactions among microor­
ganisms for microbial degradation of HFPO-DA, the microbial cooccurrence network was constructed in the soils (Fig. 5). The con­
structed network contained 136 nodes and 3621 edges, and each node 
and edge represented one genus and the strong relationship (Spearman 
correlation coefficient R＞0.7), respectively. As shown in Fig. 5a, the 
nodes were distributed in 10 phyla, during which Pseudomonadota 
(50.0 %) and Actinomycetota (40.4 %) were the major phyla, and fol­
lowed by Bacillota (2.9 %) and Myxococcota (2.2 %). The high abun­
dances and connectivity between Pseudomonadota and Actinomycetota 
suggested their potential interaction for HFPO-DA degradation in the 
soil microcosm.
Overall, all nodes in the constructed co-occurrence network were 
categorized into 4 modules (Fig. 5b). Module 1 was the largest module 
with 53 nodes, and showed the high microbial diversity with the 
covering 7 phyla. Genus Dacylosporangium, Agromyces and Gordonia 
within phylum Actinomycetota, and genus Rhodococcus and Rhodoplanes 
within phylum Pseudomonadota behaved as the key modular hubs of 
Module 1. Genus Dacylosporangium, Agromyces, Gordonia were reported 
to be responsible for the microbial degradation of PAHs [51–53]. Genus 
Rhodococcus was documented as the potential degrader of PFASs [35], 
and Rhodoplanes was widely detected in the PFAS contaminated soils 
[37]. Members in the genus Rhodoplanes were also reported to be 
associated with biodegradation of PAHs and polybrominated diphenyl 
ethers (PBDEs) [54,55]. In addition, genus Nitrosocosmicus within 
phylum Thaumarchaeota also acted as the module hub in Module 1, 
which was the well-known ammonia-oxidizing archaeon involved in 
nitrogen metabolism in the soils [55]. In the previous studies, micro­
organisms associated with nitrogen metabolism were found to play 
important roles in the assistance with members which could degrade 
organic pollutants [56].
In Module 2, genus Diaphorobacter, Anaeromyxabacter, Luteitalea and 
Nocardiodies acted as module hubs. Genus Diaphorobacter has been 
characterized as degrader of PAHs, and phenanthrene under the aerobic 
conditions [57,58]. Little information is available on the roles of genus 
Anaeromyxabacter, Luteitalea and Nocardiodies in the degradation of 
pollutants, which were warranted further studies. In Module 3, genus 
Streptomyces, Micromonospora and Bacillus behaved as the modular hubs. 
Genus Streptomyces and Micromonospora were identified as the hosts of 
potential functional genes associated with microbial degradation of 
HFPO-DA in the above discussions. Genus Bacillus was found to degrade 
PAHs and polychlorinated biphenyl [59,60]. These results indicated that 
microbial degradation of HFPO-DA could be co-metabolic via the 
cooperation of different microorganisms. Genus Rhizobium was observed 
as the potential keystone taxa in Module 4. Recently, the strain Rhizo­
bium. JF-3 was reported to be capable of degrading 4-fluoroaniline by 
monooxygenase [61]. Thus, genus Rhizobium might also involve in the 
microbial degradation of HFPO-DA, which need further studies.
Overall. the constructed co-occurrence network provided a new sight 
on microbial degradation of HFPO-DA biodegradation, indicating that 
the degradation of HFPO-DA required the interactions of multiple mi­
croorganisms. It should be noted that many degraders of aromatic 
compounds and halogen compounds were also involved into the 
degradation of HFPO-DA, and thus the co-metabolism might occur be­
tween transformation of HFPO-DA and other pollutants. Further in­
vestigations are warranted to target the specific functions of these 
potential keystone taxa in the microbial degradation of HFPO-DA.
4. Conclusions
This study broke the traditional cognition that HFPO-DA was resis­
tant to microbial degradation, and provided the first systematic char­
acterization of microbial degradation of HFPO-DA in the aerobic soils. 
During the long-period incubation of 150 days, about 51.6 ± 3.0 % of 
HFPO-DA was degraded by the indigenous aerobic microorganisms in 
soils. In total, 3 transformation products were identified based on the 
nontarget screening analysis, including a novel product (2-tri­
fluoromethyl-2-(difluoromethoxy) acetic acid), which enriched our un­
derstanding on the microbial degradation behaviors of HFPO-DA. In 
addition, TFA was detected as the terminal product, which caused the 
increasing concerns around the world due to its ubiquitous detection 
and high persistence. Based on the transformation products, the multiple 
degradation pathways were involved in the microbial degradation of 
HFPO-DA, including defluorination, decarboxylation, hydroxyl oxida­
tion, hydrolysis and C-C bond cleavage. In addition, 19 potential func­
tional genes and 37 functional gene hosts were screened for their 
contributions to HFPO-DA degradation. Meanwhile, genera Gordonia, 
Megasphaera, and Streptomyces were found as the potential keystone taxa 
in microbial degradation of HFPO-DA. Overall, the results of this study 
have the important implications for the development of bioremediation 
Fig. 5. Microbial co-occurrence networks for phylum (a) and module (b) in the 
soils after the exposure to HFPO-DA. Edge: each edge represents a strong cor­
relation (Spearman coefficient > 0.7), with red for positive correlation and 
green for negative correlation, and thickness for degree of correlation. Node: 
each node represents a genus.
Z. Xing et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Hazardous Materials 498 (2025) 139880 
7

## Page 8

strategies and regulations associated with HFPO-DA contaminated sites, 
which promote the implementation of the Action Plan on Controlling 
New Pollutants in China.
It should be noted that the potential functional genes found in this 
study should be verified in the microbial degradation of HFPO-DA via 
the gene knockout in the future studies. Meanwhile, further studies are 
warrant to confirm the degradation capacities of the hosts of potential 
functional for HFPO-DA via the isolation of hosts from the soils. Addi­
tionally, the enzymatic studies are needed to explore the key enzymes 
associated with the HFPO-DA degradation in the microorganisms. It is 
imperative to resolve these knowledge gaps to inform policies toward 
the management and remediation of emerging PFASs in the world.
Environmental implication
This study provided first evidence that HFPO-DA, a typical novel 
alternative of PFOA, could be degradation by aerobic microbes. Degra­
dation pathways, and potential functional genes and hosts were revealed 
for HFPO-DA, which was meaningful for bioremediation of contami­
nated sites.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Guangzhi Rong: Visualization, Validation, Software. Haixia Wang: 
Visualization, Resources, Methodology. Yu Liu: Writing – original draft, 
Supervision, Funding acquisition. Guoguang Wang: Writing – review & 
editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Project administration, 
Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Ziao Xing: Writing – original 
draft, Validation, Resources, Methodology, Investigation, Formal anal­
ysis, Data curation. Shuaihao Liu: Visualization, Validation, Software, 
Resources, Formal analysis. Hongyi Xue: Visualization, Software, Re­
sources, Investigation. Yana Wang: Visualization, Validation, Investi­
gation, Formal analysis.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation 
of China (grant number 41907311; 22036004), the Fundamental 
Research 
Funds 
for 
the Central Universities (grant 
number 
3132023505), and Liaoning Revitalization Talents Program (grant 
number XLYC1802036).
Appendix A. Supporting information
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the 
online version at doi:10.1016/j.jhazmat.2025.139880.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] Wang, Z., Buser, A.M., Cousins, I.T., Demattio, S., Drost, W., Johansson, O., 
Ohno, K., Patlewicz, G., Richard, A.M., Walker, G.W., White, G.S., Leinala, E., 
2021. A new OECD definition for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances. Environ Sci 
Technol 55, 15575–15578.
[2] Garnett, J., Halsall, C., Thomas, M., Crabeck, O., France, J., Joerss, H., 
Ebinghaus, R., Kaiser, J., Leeson, A., Wynn, P.M., 2021. Investigating the uptake 
and fate of Poly- and perfluoroalkylated substances (PFAS) in sea ice using an 
experimental sea ice chamber. Environ Sci Technol 55, 9601–9608.
[3] Pan, Y., Zhang, H., Cui, Q., Sheng, N., Yeung, L.W.Y., Guo, Y., Sun, Y., Dai, J., 
2017. First report on the occurrence and bioaccumulation of hexafluoropropylene 
oxide trimer acid: an emerging concern. Environ Sci Technol 51, 9553–9560.
[4] Li, Y., Yao, J., Zhang, J., Pan, Y., Dai, J., Ji, C., Tang, J., 2022. First report on the 
bioaccumulation and trophic transfer of perfluoroalkyl ether carboxylic acids in 
estuarine food web. Environ Sci Technol 56, 6046–6055.
[5] Li, Y., Yao, J., Pan, Y., Dai, J., Tang, J., 2023. Trophic behaviors of PFOA and its 
alternatives perfluoroalkyl ether carboxylic acids (PFECAs) in a coastal food web. 
J Hazard Mater 452, 131353.
[6] Dong, F., Pan, Y., Zhang, J., Hu, J., Luo, Y., Tang, J., Dai, J., Sheng, N., 2023. 
Comprehensive assessment of exposure pathways for perfluoroalkyl ether 
carboxylic acids (PFECAs) in residents near a fluorochemical industrial park: the 
unanticipated role of cereal consumption. Environ Sci Technol 57, 19442–19452.
[7] Chen, X., Xu, D., Xiao, Y., Zuo, M., Zhou, J., Sun, X., Shan, G., Zhu, L., 2024. 
Multimedia and Full-Life-Cycle monitoring discloses the dynamic accumulation 
rules of PFAS and underestimated foliar uptake in wheat near a fluorochemical 
industrial park. Environ Sci Technol 58, 18088–18097.
[8] Wang, D., Liu, X., Guo, Z., Shan, W., Yang, Z., Chen, Y., Ju, F., Zhang, Y., 2024. 
Legacy and novel Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances in surface soils across China: 
source tracking and main drivers for the spatial variation. Environ Sci Technol 58, 
20160–20171.
[9] Wang, Y., Chen, X., Wang, B., Lu, G., Liu, J., Wu, D., Yan, Z., 2023. Toxicity 
comparison of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), hexafluoropropylene oxide dimer 
acid (HFPO-DA), and hexafluoropropylene oxide trimer acid (HFPO-TA) in 
zebrafish gut. Aquat Toxicol 262, 106655.
[10] Bao, Y., Deng, S., Jiang, X., Qu, Y., He, Y., Liu, L., Chai, Q., Mumtaz, M., Huang, J., 
Cagnetta, G., Yu, G., 2018. Degradation of PFOA substitute: GenX (HFPO–DA 
ammonium salt): oxidation with UV/persulfate or reduction with UV/sulfite? 
Environ Sci Technol 52, 11728–11734.
[11] Zhang, C., Xu, Y., Liu, W., Zhou, H., Zhang, N., Fang, Z., Gao, J., Sun, X., Feng, D., 
Sun, X., 2023. New insights into the degradation mechanism and risk assessment of 
HFPO-DA by advanced oxidation processes based on activated persulfate in 
aqueous solutions. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 263, 115298.
[12] Trang, B., Li, Y., Xue, X.-S., Ateia, M., Houk, K.N., Dichtel, W.R., 2022. Lowtemperature mineralization of perfluorocarboxylic acids. Science 377, 839–845.
[13] Tang, Z., Vogel, T.M., Wang, Q., Wei, C., Ali, M., Song, X., 2024. Microbial 
defluorination of TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA by a native microbial consortium 
under anoxic conditions. J Hazard Mater 465, 133217.
[14] Jin, B., Zhu, Y., Zhao, W., Liu, Z., Che, S., Chen, K., Lin, Y.-H., Liu, J., Men, Y., 
2023. Aerobic biotransformation and defluorination of fluoroalkylether substances 
(ether PFAS): substrate specificity, pathways, and applications. Environ Sci 
Technol Lett 10, 755–761.
[15] Liu, M., Munoz, G., Vo Duy, S., Sauv´e, S., Liu, J., 2021. Stability of NitrogenContaining polyfluoroalkyl substances in aerobic soils. Environ Sci Technol 55, 
4698–4708.
[16] Xing, Z., Wang, G., Liu, S., Chen, H., Dong, X., Wang, H., Liu, Y., 2024. Legacy and 
emerging per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in agricultural soils affected 
by fluorochemical manufacturing facilities, north China: occurrence, regionspecific distribution, substitution trend and source appointment. J Hazard Mater 
474, 134770.
[17] Vermeersch, L., Perez-Samper, G., Cerulus, B., Jariani, A., Gallone, B., 
Voordeckers, K., Steensels, J., Verstrepen, K.J., 2019. On the duration of the 
microbial lag phase. Curr Genet 65, 721–727.
[18] Fang, B., Zhang, Y., Chen, H., Qiao, B., Yu, H., Zhao, M., Gao, M., Li, X., Yao, Y., 
Zhu, L., Sun, H., 2024. Stability and biotransformation of 6:2 fluorotelomer 
sulfonic acid, sulfonamide amine oxide, and sulfonamide alkylbetaine in aerobic 
sludge. Environ Sci Technol 58, 2446–2457.
[19] Dong, S., Yan, P.-F., Liu, C., Manz, K.E., Mezzari, M.P., Abriola, L.M., Pennell, K.D., 
C´apiro, N.L., 2023. Assessing aerobic biotransformation of 8:2 fluorotelomer 
alcohol in aqueous film-forming foam (AFFF)-impacted soils: pathways and 
microbial community dynamics. J Hazard Mater 446, 130629.
[20] Huang, S., Jaff´e, P.R., 2019. Defluorination of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and 
perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) by acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6. Environ Sci 
Technol 53, 11410–11419.
[21] Yu, Y., Zhang, K., Li, Z., Ren, C., Chen, J., Lin, Y.-H., Liu, J., Men, Y., 2020. 
Microbial cleavage of C–F bonds in two C6 Per- and polyfluorinated compounds via 
reductive defluorination. Environ Sci Technol 54, 14393–14402.
[22] Y. Yu, F. Xu, W. Zhao, C. Thoma, S. Che, J.E. Richman, B. Jin, Y. Zhu, Y. Xing, L. 
Wackett, Y. Men, Electron bifurcation and fluoride efflux systems implicated in 
defluorination of perfluorinated unsaturated carboxylic acids by Acetobacterium 
spp, Sci. Adv., 10 eado2957.
[23] Zhu, X., Yu, Y., Meng, W., Huang, J., Su, G., Zhong, Y., Yu, X., Sun, J., Jin, L., 
Peng, Pa, Zhu, L., 2024. Aerobic microbial transformation of fluorinated liquid 
crystal monomer: new pathways and mechanism. Environ Sci Technol 58, 
510–521.
[24] Wang, N., Buck, R.C., Szostek, B., Sulecki, L.M., Wolstenholme, B.W., 2012. 5:3 
polyfluorinated acid aerobic biotransformation in activated sludge via novel “onecarbon removal pathways”. Chemosphere 87, 527–534.
[25] Duan, Y., Sun, H., Yao, Y., Meng, Y., Li, Y., 2020. Distribution of novel and legacy 
per-/polyfluoroalkyl substances in serum and its associations with two glycemic 
biomarkers among Chinese adult men and women with normal blood glucose 
levels. Environ Int 134, 105295.
[26] Chen, H., Yao, Y., Zhao, Z., Wang, Y., Wang, Q., Ren, C., Wang, B., Sun, H., 
Alder, A.C., Kannan, K., 2018. Multimedia distribution and transfer of Per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) surrounding two fluorochemical 
manufacturing facilities in Fuxin, China. Environ Sci Technol 52, 8263–8271.
Z. Xing et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Hazardous Materials 498 (2025) 139880 
8

## Page 9

[27] Arp, H.P.H., Gredelj, A., Glüge, J., Scheringer, M., Cousins, I.T., 2024. The global 
threat from the irreversible accumulation of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Environ Sci 
Technol 58, 19925–19935.
[28] Gut, J., Christen, U., Huwyler, J., 1993. Mechanisms of halothane toxicity: novel 
insights. Pharmacol Ther 58, 133–155.
[29] Yan, P.-F., Dong, S., Manz, K.E., Woodcock, M.J., Liu, C., Mezzari, M.P., Abriola, L. 
M., Pennell, K.D., C´apiro, N.L., 2024. Aerobic biotransformation of 6:2 
fluorotelomer sulfonate in soils from two aqueous film-forming foam (AFFF)- 
impacted sites. Water Res 249, 120941.
[30] M´endez, V., Holland, S., Bhardwaj, S., McDonald, J., Khan, S., O’Carroll, D., 
Pickford, R., Richards, S., O’Farrell, C., Coleman, N., Lee, M., Manefield, M.J., 
2022. Aerobic biotransformation of 6:2 fluorotelomer sulfonate by dietzia 
aurantiaca J3 under sulfur-limiting conditions. Sci Total Environ 829, 154587.
[31] Berhanu, A., Mutanda, I., Taolin, J., Qaria, M.A., Yang, B., Zhu, D., 2023. A review 
of microbial degradation of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS): 
biotransformation routes and enzymes. Sci Total Environ 859, 160010.
[32] Ma, Y., Wang, J., Liu, Y., Wang, X., Zhang, B., Zhang, W., Chen, T., Liu, G., Xue, L., 
Cui, X., 2023. Nocardioides: “specialists” for hard-to-degrade pollutants in the 
environment. Molecules 28, 7433.
[33] Chen, J.-a, Li, X., Li, J., Cao, J., Qiu, Z., Zhao, Q., Xu, C., Shu, W., 2007. 
Degradation of environmental endocrine disruptor di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate by a 
newly discovered bacterium, microbacterium sp. Strain CQ0110Y. Appl Microbiol 
Biotechnol 74, 676–682.
[34] Balachandran, C., Duraipandiyan, V., Balakrishna, K., Ignacimuthu, S., 2012. 
Petroleum and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) degradation and 
naphthalene metabolism in streptomyces sp. (ERI-CPDA-1) Isolated from oil 
contaminated soil. Bioresour Technol 112, 83–90.
[35] Yang, S.-H., Shi, Y., Strynar, M., Chu, K.-H., 2022. Desulfonation and 
defluorination of 6:2 fluorotelomer sulfonic acid (6:2 FTSA) by rhodococcus jostii 
RHA1: carbon and sulfur sources, enzymes, and pathways. J Hazard Mater 423, 
127052.
[36] Yang, S.-H., Shan, L., Chu, K.-H., 2024. Root exudates enhanced 6:2 FTOH 
defluorination, altered metabolite profiles and shifted soil microbiome dynamics. 
J Hazard Mater 466, 133651.
[37] Dong, S., Yan, P.-F., Mezzari, M.P., Abriola, L.M., Pennell, K.D., C´apiro, N.L., 2024. 
Using network analysis and predictive functional analysis to explore the 
fluorotelomer biotransformation potential of soil microbial communities. Environ 
Sci Technol 58, 7480–7492.
[38] Zhang, Y., Mao, G., Liu, R., Zhou, X., Bartlam, M., Wang, Y., 2022. Transcriptome 
profiling of stenotrophomonas sp. Strain WZN-1 reveals mechanisms of 2,2′,4,4′- 
tetrabromodiphenyl ether (BDE-47) biotransformation. Environ Sci Technol 56, 
11288–11299.
[39] Qi, X., Zhu, M., Yuan, Y., Rong, X., Dang, Z., Yin, H., 2023. Integrated toxicology, 
metabolomics, and transcriptomics analyses reveal the biodegradation and 
adaptation mechanisms to BDE-47 in Pseudomonas plecoglossicida. Chem Eng J 
454, 140412.
[40] Stockbridge, R.B., Wackett, L.P., 2024. The link between ancient microbial fluoride 
resistance mechanisms and bioengineering organofluorine degradation or 
synthesis. Nat Commun 15, 4593.
[41] Bell, S.G., Xu, F., Forward, I., Bartlam, M., Rao, Z., Wong, L.-L., 2008. Crystal 
structure of CYP199A2, a para-substituted benzoic acid oxidizing cytochrome P450 
from Rhodopseudomonas palustris. J Mol Biol 383, 561–574.
[42] Tam, L.T., Eymann, C., Albrecht, D., Sietmann, R., Schauer, F., Hecker, M., 
Antelmann, H., 2006. Differential gene expression in response to phenol and 
catechol reveals different metabolic activities for the degradation of aromatic 
compounds in Bacillus subtilis. Environ Microbiol 8, 1408–1427.
[43] Teufel, R., Mascaraque, V., Ismail, W., Voss, M., Perera, J., Eisenreich, W., 
Haehnel, W., Fuchs, G., 2010. Bacterial phenylalanine and phenylacetate catabolic 
pathway revealed. PNAS 107, 14390–14395.
[44] Gangola, S., Bhandari, G., Joshi, S., Sharma, A., Simsek, H., Bhatt, P., 2023. 
Esterase and ALDH dehydrogenase-based pesticide degradation by Bacillus brevis 
1B from a contaminated environment. Environ Res 232, 116332.
[45] Sun, S., Wang, Y., Xu, C., Qiao, C., Chen, S., Zhao, C., Liu, Q., Zhang, X., 2023. 
Reconstruction of microbiome and functionality accelerated crude oil 
biodegradation of 2,4-DCP-oil-contaminated soil systems using composite 
microbial agent B-Cl. J Hazard Mater 447, 130808.
[46] Kim, J., Leonard, S.W., Van Meter, M.I., Kim-Fu, M.L., Cao, D., Field, J.A., Chu, K.- 
H., 2024. Nexus of soil microbiomes, genes, classes of carbon substrates, and 
biotransformation of fluorotelomer-based precursors. Environ Sci Technol.
[47] Alvarez, A., Saez, J.M., Davila Costa, J.S., Colin, V.L., Fuentes, M.S., Cuozzo, S.A., 
Benimeli, C.S., Polti, M.A., Amoroso, M.J., 2017. Actinobacteria: current research 
and perspectives for bioremediation of pesticides and heavy metals. Chemosphere 
166, 41–62.
[48] Cuozzo, S.A., Sineli, P.E., Costa, J.Davila, Tortella, G., 2018. Streptomyces sp. Is a 
powerful biotechnological tool for the biodegradation of HCH isomers: 
biochemical and molecular basis. Crit Rev Biotechnol 38, 719–728.
[49] Strycharz, S.M., Gannon, S.M., Boles, A.R., Franks, A.E., Nevin, K.P., Lovley, D.R., 
2010. Reductive dechlorination of 2-chlorophenol by anaeromyxobacter 
dehalogenans with an electrode serving as the electron donor. Environ Microbiol 
Rep 2, 289–294.
[50] Bullows, J.E., Kanak, A.E., Shedrick, L., Kiessling, C., Aklujkar, M., Kostka, J., 
Chin, K.-J.J.A., 2024. E. Microbiology, anaerobic benzene oxidation in geotalea 
daltonii involves activation by methylation and is regulated by the transition state 
regulator AbrB. Appl Environ Microbiol 90.
[51] Urana, R., Yadav, J., Panchal, S., Sharma, P., Singh, N., 2023. Phytoremediation of 
PAH compounds by microbial communities in sodic soil. Int J Phytoremediat 25, 
1501–1509.
[52] Sun, S., Wei, R., Hu, S., Yang, M., Ni, J., 2024. Isolation and characterization of 
distinctive pyrene-degrading bacteria from an uncontaminated soil. 
Biodegradation 35, 657–670.
[53] Sowani, H., Kulkarni, M., Zinjarde, S., 2019. Harnessing the catabolic versatility of 
gordonia species for detoxifying pollutants. Biotechnol Adv 37, 382–402.
[54] Li, J., Luo, C., Zhang, D., Song, M., Cai, X., Jiang, L., Zhang, G., 2018. 
Autochthonous bioaugmentation-modified bacterial diversity of phenanthrene 
degraders in PAH-Contaminated wastewater as revealed by DNA-Stable isotope 
probing. Environ Sci Technol 52, 2934–2944.
[55] Wu, Y., Song, Q., Wu, J., Zhou, J., Zhou, L., Wu, W., 2021. Field study on the soil 
bacterial associations to combined contamination with heavy metals and organic 
contaminants. Sci Total Environ 778, 146282.
[56] Xun, W., Liu, Y., Li, W., Ren, Y., Xiong, W., Xu, Z., Zhang, N., Miao, Y., Shen, Q., 
Zhang, R., 2021. Specialized metabolic functions of keystone taxa sustain soil 
microbiome stability. Microbiome 9, 35.
[57] Wang, P., Zhang, Y., Jin, J., Wang, T., Wang, J., Jiang, B., 2020. A high-efficiency 
phenanthrene-degrading diaphorobacter sp. Isolated from PAH-contaminated river 
sediment. Sci Total Environ 746, 140455.
[58] Meng, X.J., Zhang, Y.X., Jia, R., Li, X., Chai, T.Y., Wang, Y.H., 2012. Isolation and 
characterization of the phenol degradation bacterium diaphorobacter P2 strain 
from coking wastewater. Adv Mat Res 550-553, 2296–2300.
[59] Song, L., Niu, X., Zhou, B., Xiao, Y., Zou, H., 2022. Application of biocharimmobilized Bacillus sp. Ksb7 to enhance the phytoremediation of PAHs and heavy 
metals in a coking plant. Chemosphere 307, 136084.
[60] Sandhu, M., Paul, A.T., Pro´ck´ow, J., de la Lastra, J.M.P., Jha, P.N., 2022. PCB-77 
biodegradation potential of biosurfactant producing bacterial isolates recovered 
from contaminated soil. Front Microbiol 13.
[61] Zhao, Z.-Q., Zheng, T.-C., Zhang, W.-J., Shen, X.-L., Lv, L., Li, Y.-M., 2019. 
Degradation of 3-fluoroanilne by Rhizobium sp. JF3 Biodegrad 30, 433–445.
Z. Xing et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Journal of Hazardous Materials 498 (2025) 139880 
9

