# 1-s2.0-S0048969724085061-main

**Source PDF**: 1-s2.0-S0048969724085061-main.pdf

---

## Page 1

PFAS biodegradation by Labrys portucalensis F11: Evidence of chain 
shortening and identification of metabolites of PFOS, 6:2 FTS, and 5:3 FTCA
Mindula K. Wijayahena a, Irina S. Moreira b, Paula M.L. Castro b, Sarah Dowd c,  
Melissa I. Marciesky d, Carla Ng d,e, Diana S. Aga a,f,*,**
a Department of Chemistry, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, Buffalo, NY 14260, United States
b Universidade Cat´olica Portuguesa, CBQF - Centro de Biotecnologia e Química Fina – Laborat´orio Associado, Escola Superior de Biotecnologia, Rua Diogo Botelho 1327, 
4169-005 Porto, Portugal
c Waters Corporation, 34 Maple St, Milford, MA 01757, United States
d Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, United States
e Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, United States
f Research and Education in Energy, Environment and Water (RENEW), University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, Buffalo, NY 14260, United States
H I G H L I G H T S
G R A P H I C A L  A B S T R A C T
• Bacterial 
defluorination 
and 
chain 
shortening of PFOS, 6:2 FTS, 5:3 FTCA 
occurred
• PFOS removal of up to 96 % was 
observed after a 194-day incubation 
period
• After 100 day-incubation, up to 58 % of 
5:3 FTCA and 21 % of 6:2 FTS were 
removed
• Several defluorinated PFOS metabolites 
were detected during biodegradation
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Editor: Dimitra A Lambropoulou
Keywords:
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances
Aerobic biodegradation
Defluorinated metabolites
High-resolution mass spectrometry
Ion mobility separation
A B S T R A C T
The biodegradation of three per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), namely perfluorooctane sulfonic acid 
(PFOS), 6:2-fluorotelomer sulfonic acid (6:2 FTS), and 5:3-fluorotelomer carboxylic acid (5:3 FTCA), were 
evaluated using Labrys portucalensis F11, an aerobic bacteria known to defluorinate fluorine-containing com­
pounds. Cultures of L. portucalensis F11 were grown in minimal salts media and treated with 10,000 μg/L of 
individual PFAS as the sole carbon source in separate flasks. In PFOS-spiked media, several metabolites were 
detected, including perfluoroheptane sulfonic acid (PFHpS), perfluorohexane sulfonic acid (PFHxS), per­
fluorohexanoic acid (PFHxA), perfluoropentanoic acid (PFPeA), perfluorobutanoic acid (PFBA), and per­
fluoropropanoic acid (PFPrA). After 194-day incubation three de-fluorinated metabolites were identified: PFOS-F 
(m/z = 480.940, PFOS-2F (m/z = 462.980), and unsaturated PFOS-3F (m/z = 442.943). During the 
* Corresponding author at: Department of Chemistry, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, Buffalo, NY 14260, United States.
** Corresponding author at: Research and Education in Energy, Environment and Water (RENEW), University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, Buffalo, 
NY 14260, United States.
E-mail address: dianaaga@buffalo.edu (D.S. Aga). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Science of the Total Environment
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/scitotenv
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.178348
Received 3 October 2024; Received in revised form 24 December 2024; Accepted 29 December 2024  
Science of the Total Environment 959 (2025) 178348 
Available online 4 January 2025 
0048-9697/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

## Page 2

biodegradation of 5:3 FTCA, the following metabolites were observed: PFHxA, PFPeA, PFBA, PFPrA, and two 
fluorotelomer unsaturated carboxylic acids (5:3 FTUCA and 7:2 FTUCA). The biodegradation of 6:2 FTS was 
slower, with only 21 % decrease in concentration observed after 100 days, and subsequent formation of 4:2 FTS. 
On the contrary, 90 % of PFOS and 58 % of 5:3 FTCA were degraded after 100 days. These results indicate that 
L. portucalensis F11 can be potentially used for PFAS biodegradation in contaminated environments.
1. Introduction
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a class of highly 
fluorinated synthetic organic chemicals that have been extensively used 
in industrial, commercial, and domestic applications for over several 
decades now due to their surfactant-like, water-repellant, and oleo­
phobic properties (Buck et al., 2011). The carbon‑fluorine bonds char­
acteristic of PFAS exhibit very high bond dissociation energies: around 
485 kJ/mol, making PFAS generally resistant to degradation by oxida­
tion, thermal treatment, and biological mechanisms; hence PFAS has 
been dubbed as “forever chemicals” (Brunn et al., 2023). PFAS can 
bioaccumulate in humans and animals following repetitive exposure 
(Taniyasu et al., 2003), leading to adverse health outcomes. These ef­
fects include thyroid disorders, immunotoxicity, neurotoxicity, and as­
sociation with various types of cancer (Grandjean, 2018; Grandjean 
et al., 2020; Lewis et al., 2015; Vieira et al., 2013; Rios-Bonilla et al., 
2024). The stability, vast applications, and improper waste disposal 
have made PFAS ubiquitous environmental pollutants (Barzen-Hanson 
et al., 2017; Prevedouros et al., 2006; Taniyasu et al., 2003) and requires 
costly remediation efforts (Cordner et al., 2021).
Strategies to enhance the biodegradation of PFAS are of great in­
terest, particularly through bioaugmentation using microorganisms to 
degrade pollutants (Muter, 2023; Nzila et al., 2016). Bioaugmentation 
has been successfully implemented in soil bioremediation (Bokade et al., 
2023; Dagliya et al., 2022), wastewater treatment (Chen et al., 2022; 
Dutta et al., 2022), and air biofiltration (Muter, 2023). However, there is 
limited information on the microbial degradation of fluorinated com­
pounds, especially PFAS. Identifying microorganisms capable of 
degrading PFAS, evaluating their efficiency, and characterizing 
biodegradation products are critically needed because of the lack of costeffective remediation technologies capable of removing PFAS in 
contaminated environments.
Recent studies have shown that microbial communities can 
defluorinate certain PFAS, suggesting that natural microbial defluori­
nation exists (Yu et al., 2020). For instance, Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6 
(A6) was found to reduce perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) and 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in enriched cultures under anaerobic 
conditions (Huang and Jaffe, 2019). However, isolating the specific 
microorganisms responsible for PFAS biodegradation from mixed cul­
tures can be challenging, especially if they are present at low abundance, 
making them difficult to identify and enrich. A recent study reported 
defluorination of α, β-unsaturated PFAS by Acetobacterium spp. (Yu 
et al., 2024), but only measured the increase in fluoride ion concen­
trations in the media without characterizing the metabolites formed 
during biodegradation of PFAS. Various Pseudomonas spp. have been 
shown to degrade some PFAS under aerobic conditions. For instance, 
Pseudomonas parafulva YAB1 resulted in 48 % reduction in PFOA over a 
96-day incubation, but no biodegradation products nor fluoride ions 
were measured (Yi et al., 2016). Another study showed that Pseudo­
monas aeruginosa strain HJ4 isolated from the sludge of a municipal 
wastewater treatment plant decreased the concentration of PFOS by up 
to 67 % in 48 h (Kwon et al., 2014). However, no fluoride production 
was observed, and no major biodegradation products were uncovered, 
leaving one to suspect that the decrease in PFOS could be mostly due to 
adsorption rather than biodegradation. Another study demonstrated 
Pseudomonas plecoglossicida 2.4-D degraded PFOS by 75 %, increasing 
fluoride ions in the growth media, but also did not specify the degra­
dation products formed (Chetverikov et al., 2017). Additional 
information on bacterial degradation of PFAS under aerobic conditions 
from literature are listed in Table 1. Taking into account the afore­
mentioned evidence, there is a need to identify microbial strains that 
have the ability to degrade PFAS and to characterize degradation 
products formed to assess their potential for PFAS bioremediation in 
highly contaminated sites.
This study investigates the ability of Labrys portucalensis F11, an 
aerobic bacterial strain from the Xanthobacteraceae family, to biode­
grade three types of PFAS (listed in Fig. 1). Isolated from Estarreja, 
Portugal, L. portucalensis F11 has demonstrated metabolic versatility, 
effectively degrading fluorobenzene (Carvalho et al., 2008), 1,2-, 1,3-, 
and 1,4-difluorobenzenes (Moreira et al., 2012a), and fluorinated 
pharmaceuticals such as ofloxacin, norfloxacin, and ciprofloxacin 
(Amorim et al., 2014). Additionally, this bacterial strain can degrade 
fluoxetine, releasing fluoride from the perfluorinated methyl group 
(–CF3) (Moreira et al., 2014). Therefore, the current study investigated 
the ability of L. portucalensis F11 to biodegrade 8‑carbon chain PFAS 
with different headgroups and degree of fluorination on the carbon 
chain: 6:2-fluorotelomer sulfonic acid (6:2 FTS), 5:3-fluorotelomer car­
boxylic acid (5:3 FTCA), and PFOS, with structures shown in Fig. 1.
PFOS was chosen as the main test compound due to its high envi­
ronmental abundance, frequent detection in biological samples, bio­
accumulative nature, and known toxicity (Buck et al., 2011; Brunn et al., 
2023). The study also included 6:2 FTS and 5:3 FTCA to compare the 
biodegradability of polyfluorinated versus perfluorinated substances, 
and the impact of different head groups (sulfonate vs. carboxylate). 
Further, there have been reports indicating that the presence of carbon 
without fluorine in PFAS makes them more biodegradable (HardingMarjanovic et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2016). Biodegradation was eval­
uated by measuring the decrease in PFAS concentrations and identifying 
biotransformation products using liquid chromatography with tandem 
mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and ion mobility separation coupled 
with high-resolution mass spectrometry (IMS-HRMS). The results indi­
cate that L. portucalensis F11 can defluorinate and shorten the chains of 
both poly- and perfluorinated PFAS, including those with sulfonated and 
carboxylated headgroups, highlighting the potential of this bacterial 
strain for bioremediation applications in PFAS-contaminated sites.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Chemicals and reagents
Minimal salts medium (MM) was prepared with analytical grade 
chemicals (Sigma–Aldrich Saint Louis, MO) according to (Moreira et al., 
2012b) without modification. PFOS and 6:2 FTS, were purchased from 
Sigma Aldrich (Saint Louis, MO) while 5:3 FTCA was purchased from 
SynQuest laboratories, Inc. (Alachua, FL). Other details can be found in 
Supporting Information (SI).
2.2. Microorganism
The bacterial strain L. portucalensis F11 (GenBank/EMBL/DDBJ 
accession number AY362040; DSMZ accession number DSM 17916) was 
isolated from a sediment sample collected from an industrially 
contaminated site in Northern Portugal (Carvalho et al., 2008). This 
microorganism was selected for the biodegradation of PFAS due to its 
demonstrated ability to degrade fluorinated pharmaceuticals and fluo­
robenzenes (Amorim et al., 2014; Carvalho et al., 2008; Moreira et al., 
M.K. Wijayahena et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Science of the Total Environment 959 (2025) 178348 
2

## Page 3

2012a; Moreira et al., 2014). The microorganism was routinely culti­
vated on nutrient agar (NA) plates incubated for 2 days at 30 ◦C to 
prepare the inoculum for the biodegradation experiments.
2.3. Biodegradation experiments
Biodegradation of PFOS, 6:2 FTS, and 5:3 FTCA by strain 
L. portucalensis F11 was carried out under aerobic conditions in 250 mL 
sealed flasks containing 50 mL of MM supplemented with 10,000 μg/L of 
PFOS, 6:2 FTS, and 5:3 FTCA, separately. Cells of L. portucalensis F11 
were inoculated at an optical density (OD) of about 0.05 at 600 nm, and 
bacterial growth was monitored by measuring OD spectrophotometri­
cally (Helios Gamma, Unicam Instruments, UK).
All the cultures were incubated at 30 ◦C on a rotary shaker (130 
rpm). Experiments were performed in duplicate under sterile conditions. 
Abiotic control assays consisted of sealed flasks containing MM sup­
plemented with 10,000 μg/L of PFOS, 6:2 FTS, and 5:3 FTCA separately, 
without bacterial inoculation. A control for cell growth was established 
with three flasks with the same concentration of methanol without 
PFOS, 6:2 FTS, and 5:3 FTCA addition. Samples were sacrificed for 
analysis at 0, 48, 100, and 194 days to assess microbial growth and 
PFOS, 6:2 FTS, and 5:3 FTCA biodegradation. The purity of the cultures 
was evaluated through regular plating on NA plates. Abiotic control 
experiments were conducted for PFOS and 5:3 FTCA incubating for 48days. These experiments were performed under the same conditions as 
described above but without the presence of bacteria.
2.4. Analytical methods
2.4.1. Fluoride analysis
For each flask sacrificed for analysis, biomass was removed from 
culture samples by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 ◦C. The 
concentration of fluoride ions in the supernatant was monitored weekly 
using an ion-selective electrode (model Orion 96-09, Thermo Electron 
Corporation, Beverly, MA), as previously described by (Moreira et al., 
2014).
2.4.2. Solid phase extraction
Each of the culture supernatant (30 mL) was extracted and preconcentrated through solid phase extraction (SPE) using Oasis® HLB 
and Resprep® MCX cartridges in tandem (HLB-WAX SPE), as described 
in our earlier works (Guardian et al., 2020; Halwatura and Aga, 2023). 
Detailed process can be found in the SI. Extraction recovery percentages, 
the method limits of detection (LOD) and limits of quantification (LOQ) 
can be found in our previous works (Guardian et al., 2020; Halwatura 
and Aga, 2023).
2.4.3. Target analysis by liquid chromatography - tandem mass 
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)
Target analysis for 40 PFAS (listed in Table S1) was carried out using 
the LC-MS/MS method described in our previous publication (Camdzic 
et al., 2023), and concentrations were determined using isotope dilution 
with 13C-labeled PFAS analogues (MPFAC – 24 ES). Detailed instrument 
parameters can be found in the SI. To prevent potential contamination, 
materials containing polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) were excluded. 
Each run incorporated blank injections following each PFAS sample 
injection, along with extraction blanks and quality control check stan­
dards, including a 50 μg/L PFAS standard mix. Throughout the runs, the 
areas of the analyte peaks, chromatographic retention times, and 
background contaminations were closely monitored.
2.4.4. Non-target analysis using ultra performance liquid chromatography 
with ion mobility separation coupled to a time-of-flight mass spectrometer 
(UPLC/IMS-QToF/MS)
To determine the formation of PFAS metabolites that were not 
included in the targeted PFAS analysis, a non-target analysis approach 
was performed using a Waters™ Acquity Ultra Performance Liquid 
Chromatograph with a SELECT SERIES™ cyclic ion mobilityquadrupole-time-of-flight mass spectrometer (UPLC/IMS-QToF/MS) 
adopting a procedure described by (Organtini et al., 2023). A 5.0-μL 
sample was injected into the Atlantis™ Premier BEH™ C18 AX analyt­
ical column (100 × 2.1 mm × 1.7 μm) obtained from Waters Technology 
Corporation (Milford, MA). Gradient chromatography was performed 
using a flow rate of 0.30 mL/min with 2 mM ammonium acetate in 
Nanopure™ water (mobile phase A) and 0.1 % ammonium hydroxide in 
methanol (mobile phase B). Details of the UPLC/IMS-QToF/MS mobile 
phase conditions and MS parameters are described in SI, Table S2, and 
Table S3.
3. Results and discussion
High starting concentrations of PFAS that exceed typical levels found 
in environments were utilized for several critical reasons. Firstly, higher 
concentrations enable us to observe changes in the substance’s con­
centration and detection of metabolites formed without preconcentration. Secondly, elevated concentrations help the microbial 
community adapt to the substance, reducing the initial lag phase during 
which minimal degradation occurs (¨Ozel Duygan et al., 2021). While the 
spiking PFAS concentration used in this study is not typical in the nat­
ural environment, PFAS concentrations can reach up to hundreds of mg/ 
Table 1 
Microbial transformation of perfluoroalkyl sulfonic acids and polyfluoroalkyl sulfonic acids under aerobic conditions from literature.
PFAS
Microbial strain
Incubation time 
(days)
% of removal of starting PFAS
Transformation products
Reference
Perfluoroalkyl sulfonic acids
PFHxS
Pseudomonas strains PS27 and 
PDMF10
7
~30–40 % reduction of 
bioaccumulation
–
(Presentato et al., 
2020)
PFOS
Pseudomonas aeruginosa HJ4
48
67
PFHxS, PFBS
(Kwon et al., 2014)
Pseudomonas plecoglossicida 
2.4-D
6
In liquid media- ~100
PFHpA, F−
(Chetverikov et al., 
2017)
Pseudomonas plecoglossicida 
2.4-D
~180
In soil- 75
–
Polyfluoroalkyl sulfonic acids
6:2 
FTS
Gordonia sp. NB4-1Y
7
99.9
6:2 FTCA (C6F13CH2CO2H), 6:2 
FTUCA (C4F11CF=CHCO2H), 5:3 FTCA, 4:3 FTCA, 
PFHxA, PFPeA, PFBA
(Shaw et al., 2019)
Rhodococcus jostii RHA1
~3
99
6:2 FTUCA, α-OH 5:3 FTCA, PFHpA, 6:2 FTUSA, 
(C6F13CH=CHSO3H)
(Yang et al., 2022)
Enrich with Dietzia aurantiaca 
J3
7
~100
6:2 FTCA, 6:2 FTUCA, 5:3 FTCA, PFHxA, PFPeA, F−
(Mendez et al., 
2022)
M.K. Wijayahena et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Science of the Total Environment 959 (2025) 178348 
3

## Page 4

L levels in manufacturing wastes (Prevedouros et al., 2006) and in spent 
granulated activated carbon (DiStefano et al., 2022).
3.1. Evidence of defluorination and chain-shortening of PFAS
A significant increase in the concentration of F−(114 μg/L: 2 % of 
defluorination) was observed for PFOS after 48 days of incubation, 
which increased further in the last sample collected at 194 days (219 μg/ 
L: 3 % of defluorination). Removal of up to 96 % of the initial PFOS was 
also observed after 194-day incubation, indicating biodegradation of 
PFOS by L. portucalensis F11. The increase in fluoride ion concentration 
and a corresponding decrease in PFOS over the period of incubation is 
shown in Fig. 2A.
Defluorination of 6:2 FTS and 5:3 FTCA by L. portucalensis F11 were 
also observed. Analysis of the culture media spiked with 6:2 FTS 
collected after 100-day incubation revealed increase in F−concentration 
(76 μg/L: 1 % of defluorination) and a corresponding decrease in 6:2 FTS 
concentration (Table S6); the 48-day sample did not have detectable F−
and was therefore not analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Similarly, decrease in 5:3 
FTCA over the period of 100 days was accompanied by increase in 
fluoride ions, with concentration reaching 86 μg/L (1 % of defluorina­
tion) (Fig. 2C) at the end of the incubation period. Both concentrations 
of 6:2 FTS and 5:3 FTCA decreased in the culture media by 21 % and 58 
% respectively, at around 100 days of incubation (Fig. 6).
The cell growth pattern was very similar in all the tested conditions, 
in the presence or absence (growth control) of PFAS, with the maximum 
OD600 of 0.233 ± 0.017 observed at 48 days. There was no evidence that 
the degradation of PFAS contributed to the growth of the bacteria; 
however, at the concentrations of PFOS, 6:2 FTS, and 5:3 FTCA used in 
the experiments, the amount of carbon could be too low to support 
bacterial growth. On the other hand, there was also no evidence of the 
toxic effect of the tested PFAS on L. portucalensis F11 cells, as the pres­
ence of these compounds did not affect growth.
No fluoride release was observed in the abiotic control, indicating 
that chemical or photolytic degradation of PFAS did not occur in the 
absence of L. portucalensis F11 cells. The abiotic controls for PFOS and 
5:3 FTCA showed only around 0.2 % decrease in the corresponding PFAS 
in the culture media, indicating that the loss of spiked PFAS during the 
experimental procedure is negligible and there is no significant 
adsorption to the glassware. Data obtained from the biomass (Table S4) 
also showed that no significant amount of PFAS accumulated in the 
bacterial cells.
3.2. Biodegradation of PFOS and formation of metabolites
The spiked PFOS used as sole carbon source by L. portucalensis F11 
was biodegraded into shorter chain metabolites, which were detected 
across the sampling points at 48, 100 and 194 days. Target analysis of 
the 48-day culture media revealed the formation of perfluoroheptane 
sulfonic acid (PFHpS), perfluorohexane sulfonic acid (PFHxS), per­
fluorohexanoic acid (PFHxA), perfluoropentanoic acid (PFPeA), per­
fluorobutanoic acid (PFBA), and perfluoropropanoic acid (PFPrA) 
(Fig. 2B). The metabolites detected in the target analysis matched the 
retention times of the isotopically labeled standards, as well as the ex­
pected MS/MS fragmentation pattern and ion ratios of the PFAS stan­
dards. Similar transformation products were detected for the repeated 
6:2 FTS and 5:3 FTCA spiked samples for 194-day incubation (Table S5).
The production of perfluorocarboxylic acids (PFCAs) indicates that 
during the biodegradation of PFOS, the sulfonic acid head group is 
converted to a carboxylic acid group, as indicated in the proposed 
biotransformation pathway in Fig. 3. Based on a previous study (Cook 
et al., 1998), desulfonative enzymes in aerobic bacteria are generally 
regulated by induction when the sulfonate acts as a carbon and energy 
source, or by a global sulfur scavenging network when the sulfonate is 
utilized as a sulfur source. Further, the formation of carboxylated me­
tabolites may have been promoted by the enzymatic activities of the 
bacteria as discussed by Yang et al. (2022). Another study suggested that 
the increased concentration of acetate in the culture media accompanies 
the biodegradation of PFOS (Huang and Jaffe, 2019), which may have 
promoted the formation of carboxylated metabolites. In proposing 
degradation pathways based on the metabolites identified in this study, 
we conducted a comparison with other PFAS-degrading bacteria and 
analyzed various degradation pathways to strengthen our findings. 
Table 1 summarizes the microbial transformation of perfluoroalkyl 
sulfonic acids, polyfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids, and polyfluoroalkyl 
sulfonic acids under aerobic conditions, as reported in the literature. 
These literature findings are consistent with our results and proposed 
degradation pathways.
The detection of shorter-chain PFAS in the culture media, along with 
the increased formation of fluoride ions, clearly indicate that 
L. portucalensis F11 has the ability to degrade PFOS. However, we hy­
pothesize that the concentrations of the detected shorter-chain PFAS 
shown in Fig. 2B are underestimated because there may be other me­
tabolites that have escaped detection by LC-MS/MS, including those that 
are volatile. The volatility of carboxylated PFAS increases with a 
decrease in chain length, resulting in loss to the atmosphere at the cul­
ture temperatures used (Mancinelli et al., 2023). In fact, the data from 
the second set of experiments (Table S5) showed the formation of 
shorter-chain PFAS, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and PFPrA, supporting 
our hypothesis. Unlike the first set, the samples from this second set of 
experiments were shipped and analyzed immediately, and were not 
stored for a prolonged period of time.
3.3. Identification of additional by-products of PFOS by non-target 
analysis
Non-target analysis using HRMS combined with IMS was used to 
identify other metabolites that were not included in the targeted anal­
ysis. Adding IMS gives the possibility to resolve species of interest from 
coeluting matrix interferences and separate structural isomers based on 
their collision cross section (CCS) (Izquierdo-Sandoval et al., 2022). 
Measured drift times (DT) in the IMS cell can be used to calculate CCS 
values that can serve as an additional parameter for identifying un­
known metabolites. Based on the detected amounts of targeted PFAS 
metabolites, the remaining PFOS concentration, and the released F−in 
the culture media, much of the fluorine content of the spiked PFAS 
remained unaccounted for.
While many peaks were detected with non-targeted analysis, a few 
major peaks of interest were selected for identification. Previous studies 
have demonstrated that compounds containing halogens such as fluo­
rine occupy a unique space in the plots of CCS vs m/z values because 
halogenated compounds have smaller CCS values than compounds 
without halogen with the same m/z (Dodds et al., 2020; Foster et al., 
2022; MacNeil et al., 2022; Mullin et al., 2020).
Fig. 1. Structures of A) perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS), B) 6:2-fluorotelomer sulfonic acid (6:2 FTS), and C) 5:3-fluorotelomer carboxylic acid (5:3 FTCA).
M.K. Wijayahena et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Science of the Total Environment 959 (2025) 178348 
4

## Page 5

As a starting point, the PFOS sample from the 194-day incubation 
was screened because it exhibited the highest number of metabolites 
detected by targeted LC-MS/MS analysis. Interestingly, non-targeted 
analysis identified three new additional metabolites of PFOS (Fig. 3). 
Each detected metabolite was assigned a corresponding confidence level 
based on the experimental m/z ratio, fragmentation pattern, retention 
time, mass defect, and isotopic pattern, as described in a previous 
publication (Charbonnet et al., 2022). The first metabolite identified 
(PFOS-F) had the formula of C8H2F16O3S, indicating the substitution of 
one fluorine with a hydrogen atom. The observed m/z value for the [MH]- adduct for PFOS-F (m/z = 480.940) matched the theoretical m/z 
within 5 ppm error. Fragment ions detected in the high collision energy 
spectrum of this compound matched the theoretical fragmentation of the 
proposed structure (Fig. S1). The PFOS-F detection was therefore 
assigned a confidence level of 3a because the location of the hydrogen 
substitution remains ambiguous.
The second metabolite (PFOS-2F) was tentatively identified with the 
formula of C8H3F15O3S where two fluorine atoms in PFOS were 
substituted with two hydrogen atoms. The observed m/z for PFOS-2F 
(m/z = 462.980) matched the theoretical m/z value within 5 ppm 
error, and the MS/MS fragmentation matched the proposed structure 
(Fig. S2). Consequently, the PFOS-2F detection was assigned a confi­
dence level of 3a because the locations of the hydrogen substitutions 
also remain ambiguous.
Lastly, a third metabolite (PFAS-3F) was tentatively identified with 
the formula of C8H2F14O3S; an unsaturated PFOS resulting from 
defluorination and dehydrogenation with a measured mass (m/z =
442.943) that matched the theoretical m/z value within 5 ppm error 
(Fig. S3). While more than 3 diagnostic fragment ions were detected, the 
confidence level was also assigned as 3a because the locations of 
defluorination and unsaturation in the molecule remain ambiguous.
Many PFAS, including PFOS, exist as branched and linear isomeric 
mixtures in natural environments due to their manufacturing process 
(Benskin et al., 2010; Dodds et al., 2020). The PFOS standard used as the 
carbon source for L. portucalensis F11 was a mixture of these linear and 
branched isomers which are partially separated chromatographically 
(Fig. 4A). Ion mobility spectrometry provides an extra dimension of 
separation and allows the separation of the branched PFOS isomers. 
Coupling LC separation with 6 passes in the cyclic IMS device (IMS 
resolution ~159 Ω/ΔΩ) revealed over 11 isomers of PFOS (Fig. 4A).
The defluorination processes and the subsequent formation of double 
bonds can occur in any of the isomers of PFOS, which results in me­
tabolites that consist of numerous structural isomers with different CCS 
values; these isomers may be separated based on their CCS values using 
UPLC/IMS-QToF/MS. The use of IMS with 3 passes in the cyclic device 
(IMS resolution ~112 Ω/ΔΩ) to characterize the defluorinated metab­
olites of PFOS revealed the presence of at least 9 isomers, for PFOS-F 
(Fig. 4B), with possibly more at lower intensities. For PFOS-3F anal­
ysis using 3 passes in the cyclic device (IMS resolution ~112 Ω/ΔΩ), at 
least 13 isomers were observed (Fig. 4C). The formation of isomers 
during metabolism likely results from the bacterial strain’s ability to 
remove fluoride from any carbon, and the potential to form the double 
bond at any place along the carbon backbone of PFOS. Results from 
these analyses suggest that while chain shortening is an important 
degradation pathway, transformation into defluorinated by-products of 
the same chain length might be as equally important during the 
biodegradation of PFOS. It is notable that only 3 % of fluoride ions were 
detected in the media, even after a 90 % decrease in PFOS was observed. 
While the identified degradation products suggest chain-shortening and 
dehalogenation as important biodegradation pathways it was difficult to 
quantify how much of the parent PFAS were actually converted to 
dehalogenated PFAS because quantification of metabolites was not 
possible without standards. Similarly, mass balance based on quantifi­
cation of fluoride ions released was not achieved using the current setup, hence it is not possible to accurately determine what the main 
degradation pathway is and is outside the scope of this study.
3.4. Degradation of sulfonated (6:2 FTS) and carboxylated (5:3 FTCA) 
fluorotelomers
Additional studies were performed to assess the ability of 
L. portucalensis F11 to degrade other PFAS and to determine the 
Fig. 2. Plot showing the decrease in PFOS and the corresponding increase in fluoride ions (A), the formation of shorter-chain PFAS metabolites (PFHpS, PFHxS, 
PFHxA, PFPeA, PFBA and PFPrA) from PFOS biodegradation (B) plot showing the decrease in 5:3 FTCA and the corresponding increase in fluoride ions (C), the 
formation of shorter-chain PFAS metabolites (PFHxA, PFPeA, PFBA and PFPrA) from 5:3 FTCA biodegradation (D) detected at 0, 48, 100, and 194 days of incubation.
M.K. Wijayahena et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Science of the Total Environment 959 (2025) 178348 
5

## Page 6

influence of headgroup and degree of fluorination. Hence, separate 
bacterial cultures were treated with 6:2 FTS and 5:3 FTCA, both of which 
are 8‑carbon chain fluorotelomers, but with different headgroups. When 
fluoride ions were detectable in cultures, samples were harvested and 
analyzed by target LC-MS/MS. Hence, the initial sample (0-day incu­
bation) and final sample (~100-day incubation) cultures treated with 
6:2 FTS and 5:3 FTCA were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.
Removal of up to 21 % of the initial 6:2 FTS was observed in the final 
sample Fig. 6; 6:2 FTS concentrations in the spiked cultures decreased 
with time while the detected free fluoride in the culture media was 
observed above the limit of detection (Table S6). Over 100 days, the 
shorter chain fluorotelomer 4:2 FTS (Table S6) was detected as a 
metabolite as shown in Fig. 5, demonstrating that the spiked 6:2 FTS was 
degraded by the L. portucalensis F11. The metabolite matched the 
retention time, MS/MS fragmentation pattern, and ion ratio of the cor­
responding PFAS standard 4:2 FTS. The formation of short-chain 
metabolite by defluorination and decarboxylation is shown in Fig. 5.
Removal of up to 58 % of the initial 5:3 FTCA was observed in the 
final sample Fig. 6; 5:3 FTCA concentrations in the spiked cultures 
decreased with time (Fig. 2C) while the detected free fluoride in the 
culture media increased. The 5:3 FTCA biodegradation products were 
shorter chain PFAS, including PFHxA, PFPeA, PFBA, and PFPrA, and 
were detected over 100 to 194-day incubation (Fig. 2D), demonstrating 
that the spiked 5:3 FTCA was degraded by the L. portucalensis F11 
(Fig. 7). Similar transformation products with closer concentrations 
were detected for the repeated 6:2 FTS and 5:3 FTCA spiked samples for 
194-day incubation (Table S5).
The metabolites detected in the targeted analysis matched the 
retention times of the isotopically labeled standards, MS/MS fragmen­
tation pattern, and ion ratios with corresponding PFAS standards. The 
MS/MS fragmentation pattern and retention times of the metabolites 
also matched the corresponding standards. However, as noted above it is 
likely that the concentrations of the detected shorter-chain PFAS are 
underestimated because there may be other metabolites that could have 
escaped detection by target LC-MS/MS, including those that are volatile.
The 5:3 FTCA final sample was used for non-target analysis as it 
Fig. 3. Proposed biotransformation pathway for PFOS, showing the formation of detected metabolites, during the biodegradation by L. portucalensis F11. 
Defluorination, desulfonation, carboxylation, dehydrogenation, and chain-shortening of PFOS were observed. The number of carbons in the backbone chain is 
indicated inside the parenthesis to indicate the shortening of PFAS during biodegradation. PFOS-F, PFOS-2F, and PFOS-3F were identified at confidence level 3a, 
while the others were identified as level 1.
M.K. Wijayahena et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Science of the Total Environment 959 (2025) 178348 
6

## Page 7

exhibited the highest number of metabolites detected during targeted 
LC-MS/MS analysis. Interestingly, the non-targeted analysis identified 
two metabolites of 5:3 FTCA in addition to those detected via targeted 
analysis (Fig. 7). The first putative metabolite was assigned with the 
formula C8H3F11O2 and a proposed structure of 5:3 fluorotelomer un­
saturated carboxylic acid (5:3 FTUCA), resulting from dehydrogenation. 
The observed m/z value for the 5:3 FTUCA (m/z = 338.990) matched the 
theoretical m/z within 5 ppm, and the high collision energy fragmen­
tation had diagnostic ions at 10.83-min (Fig. S4). The 5:3 FTUCA 
detection was therefore assigned a confidence level of 2b.
The second metabolite of 5:3 FTCA was one carbon shorter and 
assigned with a formula C7H2F10O2 (m/z = 306.982), this was tenta­
tively identified as 5:2 fluorotelomer unsaturated carboxylic acid (5:2 
FTUCA). The identification of this metabolite was assigned a confidence 
level of 2b. The observed fragmentation pattern of 5:2 FTUCA in the 
high collision energy spectrum (Fig. S5) matched that of a reference 
standard for 6:2 FTUCA. Additionally, the observed CCS of the tenta­
tively identified 5:2 FTUCA sits on the trendline created when plotting 
CCS vs m/z with the measured CCS values of 6:2 FTUCA and 8:2 FTUCA 
(Fig. S6). Subclasses of PFAS with the same headgroup have distinct 
mass/CCS trendlines (Dodds et al., 2020), and seeing that the value for 
the proposed identification of 5:2 FTUCA is on this trendline gives 
increased confidence in its identification. During the non-target analysis 
Fig. 4. Extracted ion chromatograms (top figure) and extracted ion mobilograms (bottom figures) exhibiting separation of (A) isomers of PFOS (m/z = 498.932), and 
isomers of defluorinated PFOS: (B) Isomers of PFOS-F (m/z = 480.940), and (C) Isomers of PFOS-3F (m/z = 442.942). Mobilograms are plots of drift times versus 
retention times for the selected m/z.
Fig. 5. Proposed biotransformation pathways of detected metabolites detected 
during the biodegradation of 6:2 FTS by L. portucalensis F11 using targeted 
analysis by Liquid chromatography - Tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). 
All the compounds were identified as confidence level 1.
Fig. 6. Plot showing the percentage of degradation of 6:2 FTS, 5:3 FTCA, and 
PFOS in the final sample (100-day incubation) by L. portucalensis F11 bacte­
rial strain.
M.K. Wijayahena et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Science of the Total Environment 959 (2025) 178348 
7

## Page 8

of the 194-day incubation 5:3 FTCA sample, isomeric products as we 
demonstrated for PFOS (Fig. 4) were not identified.
In this study, the combined results from target and non-target anal­
ysis demonstrated the remarkable ability of L. portucalensis F11 to cleave 
the strong and stable C–F bonds present in PFOS, 6:2 FTS and 5:3 FTCA 
as shown in Fig. 3, Fig. 5, and Fig. 7 respectively. PFOS possesses a 
sulfonic acid head group, while 5:3 FTCA contains a carboxylic acid 
head group; despite the differences in head group chemistry, we 
observed the formation of biodegradation products, including shorterchain PFAS, for the three tested compounds.
3.5. Environmental implications
The results of this study demonstrated that this bacterial strain may 
be a good candidate for bioremediation of PFAS-contaminated sites, 
such as in bioaugmentation strategies. L. portucalensis F11 may also be 
potentially used for seeding activated sludge in wastewater treatment 
plants, especially in the treatment of industrial wastes from 
manufacturing companies or in the semiconductor industries where 
PFAS are used in large quantities and end up in wastewater (Ober et al., 
2022). As this aerobic bacterial strain was isolated from industrial 
waste-contaminated sites (Carvalho et al., 2008), it is well adapted to 
harsh environmental conditions extending its applicability in highly 
contaminated sites. The strain is able to grow at a temperature range of 
16–37 ◦C and a pH range of 4.0–8.0 (Carvalho et al., 2008), which 
confers a great potential for adaptation to various environmental 
conditions.
In this study, we showed the formation of several structural isomers 
resulting from the biodegradation of PFOS. These findings have several 
important implications because the federal regulations on the occur­
rence of PFAS in the environment are implemented only for the linear 
isomers, and toxicity studies do not consider the influence of the 
branched isomers. However, since PFAS bioaccumulation is facilitated 
by protein transporters (Forsthuber et al., 2020), it is likely that binding 
affinities and toxicity vary among isomers. It is also well known that 
structural isomers of organic chemicals significantly affect their bio­
logical activities. Therefore, the isomeric distribution of PFAS cannot be 
neglected as it may impact negative health effects, resulting in higher or 
lower potency compared with their linear counterparts. The findings in 
this study not only underscore the importance of fundamental scientific 
research but also create opportunities for engineering applications to 
carry out bioremediation of persistent halogenated compounds such as 
PFAS.
4. Conclusion
To date, L. portucalensis strain F11 is one of the few isolated micro­
organisms that has been reported to degrade PFAS successfully, as evi­
denced in the biodegradation of PFOS, 6:2 FTS, and 5:3 FTCA into 
shorter-chain compounds and production of fluoride ions in the 
Fig. 7. Proposed biotransformation pathways of detected metabolites formed during the biodegradation of 5:3 FTCA by L. portucalensis F11 showing defluorination, 
hydrogenation, and decarboxylation. The 5:3 FTUCA and 5:2 FTUCA were identified with confidence level 2b while the others were identified with level 1.
M.K. Wijayahena et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Science of the Total Environment 959 (2025) 178348 
8

## Page 9

culture media. Notably, L. portucalensis F11 has the ability to degrade 
both per-fluorinated and poly-fluorinated compounds: up to 96 % of 
spiked PFOS after a 194-day incubation, and 58 % of spiked 5:3 FTCA 
and 21 % of spiked 6:2 FTS removed after 100 days incubation. Me­
tabolites of PFOS degradation from 7‑carbon to 3‑carbon: PFHpS, 
PFHxS, PFHxA, PFPeA, PFBA, and PFPrA were detected in PFOS-spiked 
media. In 194-day incubation, three de-fluorinated metabolites were 
identified: PFOS-F (m/z = 480.940), PFOS-2F (m/z = 462.980), and 
unsaturated PFOS-3F (m/z = 442.943). During the degradation of 5:3 
FTCA, several metabolites were formed: PFHxA, PFPeA, PFBA, PFPrA, 
5:3 FTUCA, and 7:2 FTUCA. In 6:2 FTS-spiked media, 4:2 FTS was 
detected. While further experiments are needed to evaluate the ability of 
L. portucalensis F11 in degrading a wide range of “forever chemicals”, 
results from this study lay the foundation for optimizing analytical 
conditions to understand the mechanism of PFAS biodegradation by 
L. portucalensis F11, which in turn will provide critical insights that will 
inform the design of effective bioremediation strategies.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Mindula K. Wijayahena: Writing – review & editing, Visualization, 
Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, 
Conceptualization. Irina S. Moreira: Writing – review & editing, 
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptu­
alization. Paula M.L. Castro: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, 
Project administration, Funding acquisition. Sarah Dowd: Writing – 
review & editing, Methodology, Formal analysis. Melissa I. Marciesky: 
Writing – review & editing. Carla Ng: Writing – review & editing. Diana 
S. Aga: Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Supervision, Project 
administration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that there are no financial conflicts of interest or 
personal relationships that could have influenced the research presented 
in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Institute of Health, Na­
tional Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS Award 
#R01ES032717). We would also like to thank the scientific collabora­
tion of CBQF under the FCT project UID/Multi/UIDB/50016/2020. 
Diana S. Aga also acknowledges financial support from Fulbright Global 
Scholar Award Program.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Additional chemical, experimental, and instrumental details, 
including additional mass spectra, repeated sample data. Supplementary 
data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sc 
itotenv.2024.178348.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Amorim, C.L., Moreira, I.S., Maia, A.S., Tiritan, M.E., Castro, P.M., 2014. Biodegradation 
of ofloxacin, norfloxacin, and ciprofloxacin as single and mixed substrates by Labrys 
portucalensis F11. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 98 (7), 3181–3190. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s00253-013-5333-8.
Barzen-Hanson, K.A., Roberts, S.C., Choyke, S., Oetjen, K., McAlees, A., Riddell, N., 
McCrindle, R., Ferguson, P.L., Higgins, C.P., Field, J.A., 2017. Discovery of 40 classes 
of per- and Polyfluoroalkyl substances in historical aqueous film-forming foams 
(AFFFs) and AFFF-impacted groundwater. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51 (4), 2047–2057. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.6b05843.
Benskin, J.P., Yeung, L.W.Y., Yamashita, N., Taniyasu, S., Lam, P.K.S., Martin, J.W., 
2010. Perfluorinated acid isomer profiling in water and quantitative assessment of 
manufacturing source. Environ. Sci. Technol. 44 (23), 9049–9054. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/es102582x.
Bokade, P., Gaur, V.K., Tripathi, V., Bobate, S., Manickam, N., Bajaj, A., 2023. Bacterial 
remediation of pesticide polluted soils: exploring the feasibility of site restoration. 
J. Hazard. Mater. 441, 129906. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2022.129906.
Brunn, H., Arnold, G., K¨orner, W., Rippen, G., Steinh¨auser, K.G., Valentin, I., 2023. PFAS: 
forever chemicals—persistent, bioaccumulative and mobile. Reviewing the status 
and the need for their phase out and remediation of contaminated sites. 
Environmental sciences. Europe 35 (1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12302-02300721-8.
Buck, R.C., Franklin, J., Berger, U., Conder, J.M., Cousins, I.T., de Voogt, P., Jensen, A.A., 
Kannan, K., Mabury, S.A., van Leeuwen, S.P.J., 2011. Perfluoroalkyl and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances in the environment: terminology, classification, and 
origins. Integr. Environ. Assess. Manag. 7 (4), 513–541. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
ieam.258.
Camdzic, D., Welgama, H.K., Crawley, M.R., Avasthi, A., Cook, T.R., Aga, D.S., 2023. 
Rapid capture of per- and Polyfluoroalkyl substances using a self-assembling 
zirconium-based metal-organic cage. ACS Appl. Eng. Mater. 2 (1), 87–95. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acsaenm.3c00592.
Carvalho, M.F., De Marco, P., Duque, A.F., Pacheco, C.C., Janssen, D.B., Castro, P.M.L., 
2008. Labrys portucalensis sp. nov., a fluorobenzene-degrading bacterium isolated 
from an industrially contaminated sediment in northern Portugal. Int. J. Syst. Evol. 
Microbiol. 58 (3), 692–698. https://doi.org/10.1099/ijs.0.65472-0.
Charbonnet, J.A., McDonough, C.A., Xiao, F., Schwichtenberg, T., Cao, D., Kaserzon, S., 
Thomas, K.V., Dewapriya, P., Place, B.J., Schymanski, E.L., Field, J.A., Helbling, D. 
E., Higgins, C.P., 2022. Communicating confidence of per- and Polyfluoroalkyl 
substance identification via high-resolution mass spectrometry. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. Lett. 9 (6), 473–481. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.estlett.2c00206.
Chen, Y., Wang, S., Geng, N., Wu, Z., Xiong, W., Su, H., 2022. Artificially constructing 
mixed bacteria system for bioaugmentation of nitrogen removal from saline 
wastewater at low temperature. J. Environ. Manag. 324, 116351. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jenvman.2022.116351.
Chetverikov, S.P., Sharipov, D.A., Korshunova, T.Y., Loginov, O.N., 2017. Degradation of 
perfluorooctanyl sulfonate by strain Pseudomonas plecoglossicida 2.4-D. Appl. 
Biochem. Microbiol. 53 (5), 533–538. https://doi.org/10.1134/ 
S0003683817050027.
Cook, A.M., Laue, H., Junker, F., 1998. Microbial desulfonation. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 22 
(5), 399–419. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6976.1998.tb00378.x.
Cordner, A., Goldenman, G., Birnbaum, L.S., Brown, P., Miller, M.F., Mueller, R., 
Patton, S., Salvatore, D.H., Trasande, L., 2021. The true cost of PFAS and the benefits 
of acting now. Environ. Sci. Technol. 55 (14), 9630–9633. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acs.est.1c03565.
Dagliya, M., Satyam, N., Sharma, M., Garg, A., 2022. Experimental study on mitigating 
wind erosion of calcareous desert sand using spray method for microbially induced 
calcium carbonate precipitation. J. Rock Mech. Geotech. Eng. 14 (5), 1556–1567. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrmge.2021.12.008.
DiStefano, R., Feliciano, T., Mimna, R.A., Redding, A.M., Matthis, J., 2022. Thermal 
destruction of PFAS during full-scale reactivation of PFAS-laden granular activated 
carbon. Remediat. J. 32 (4), 231–238. https://doi.org/10.1002/rem.21735.
Dodds, J.N., Hopkins, Z.R., Knappe, D.R.U., Baker, E.S., 2020. Rapid characterization of 
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) by ion mobility spectrometry–mass 
spectrometry (IMS-MS). Anal. Chem. 92 (6), 4427–4435. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acs.analchem.9b05364.
Dutta, N., Usman, M., Ashraf, M.A., Luo, G., Zhang, S., 2022. A critical review of recent 
advances in the bio-remediation of chlorinated substances by microbial 
dechlorinators. Chem. Eng. J. Adv. 12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceja.2022.100359.
Forsthuber, M., Kaiser, A.M., Granitzer, S., Hassl, I., Hengstschl¨ager, M., Stangl, H., 
Gundacker, C., 2020. Albumin is the major carrier protein for PFOS, PFOA, PFHxS, 
PFNA and PFDA in human plasma. Environ. Int. 137, 105324. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.envint.2019.105324.
Foster, M., Rainey, M., Watson, C., Dodds, J.N., Kirkwood, K.I., Fern´andez, F.M., 
Baker, E.S., 2022. Uncovering PFAS and other xenobiotics in the dark metabolome 
using ion mobility spectrometry, mass defect analysis, and machine learning. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 56 (12), 9133–9143. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
est.2c00201.
Grandjean, P., 2018. Delayed discovery, dissemination, and decisions on intervention in 
environmental health: a case study on immunotoxicity of perfluorinated alkylate 
substances. Environ. Health 17 (1), 62. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-018-0405y.
Grandjean, P., Timmermann, C.A.G., Kruse, M., Nielsen, F., Vinholt, P.J., Boding, L., 
Heilmann, C., Molbak, K., 2020. Severity of COVID-19 at elevated exposure to 
perfluorinated alkylates. PLoS One 15 (12), e0244815. https://doi.org/10.1371/ 
journal.pone.0244815.
Guardian, M.G.E., Boongaling, E.G., Bernardo-Boongaling, V.R.R., Gamonchuang, J., 
Boontongto, T., Burakham, R., Arnnok, P., Aga, D.S., 2020. Prevalence of per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in drinking and source water from two Asian 
countries. Chemosphere 256, 127115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chemosphere.2020.127115.
Halwatura, L.M., Aga, D.S., 2023. Broad-range extraction of highly polar to non-polar 
organic contaminants for inclusive target analysis and suspect screening of 
environmental samples. Sci. Total Environ. 893, 164707. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2023.164707.
Harding-Marjanovic, K.C., Houtz, E.F., Yi, S., Field, J.A., Sedlak, D.L., Alvarez-Cohen, L., 
2015. Aerobic biotransformation of fluorotelomer thioether amido sulfonate 
M.K. Wijayahena et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Science of the Total Environment 959 (2025) 178348 
9

## Page 10

(Lodyne) in AFFF-amended microcosms. Environ. Sci. Technol. 49 (13), 7666–7674. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b01219.
Huang, S., Jaffe, P.R., 2019. Defluorination of Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and 
Perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) by Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 53 (19), 11410–11419. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.9b04047.
Izquierdo-Sandoval, D., Fabregat-Safont, D., Lacalle-Bergeron, L., Sancho, J.V., 
Hernandez, F., Portoles, T., 2022. Benefits of ion mobility separation in GC-APCIHRMS screening: from the construction of a CCS library to the application to realworld samples. Anal. Chem. 94 (25), 9040–9047. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
analchem.2c01118.
Kwon, B.G., Lim, H.J., Na, S.H., Choi, B.I., Shin, D.S., Chung, S.Y., 2014. Biodegradation 
of perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) as an emerging contaminant. Chemosphere 109, 
221–225. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.01.072.
Lewis, R.C., Johns, L.E., Meeker, J.D., 2015. Serum biomarkers of exposure to 
Perfluoroalkyl substances in relation to serum testosterone and measures of thyroid 
function among adults and adolescents from NHANES 2011–2012. Int. J. Environ. 
Res. Public Health 6098–6114.
MacNeil, A., Li, X., Amiri, R., Muir, D.C.G., Simpson, A., Simpson, M.J., Dorman, F.L., 
Jobst, K.J., 2022. Gas chromatography-(cyclic) ion mobility mass spectrometry: a 
novel platform for the discovery of unknown per-/Polyfluoroalkyl substances. Anal. 
Chem. 94 (31), 11096–11103. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.2c02325.
Mancinelli, M., Martucci, A., Ahrens, L., 2023. Exploring the adsorption of short and long 
chain per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) to different zeolites using 
environmental samples. Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol. 9 (10), 2595–2604. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/D3EW00225J.
Mendez, V., Holland, S., Bhardwaj, S., McDonald, J., Khan, S., O’Carroll, D., Pickford, R., 
Richards, S., O’Farrell, C., Coleman, N., Lee, M., Manefield, M.J., 2022. Aerobic 
biotransformation of 6:2 fluorotelomer sulfonate by Dietzia aurantiaca J3 under 
sulfur-limiting conditions. Sci. Total Environ. 829, 154587. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.154587.
Moreira, I.S., Amorim, C.L., Carvalho, M.F., Castro, P.M., 2012a. Degradation of 
difluorobenzenes by the wild strain Labrys portucalensis. Biodegradation 23 (5), 
653–662. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10532-012-9541-1.
Moreira, I.S., Amorim, C.L., Carvalho, M.F., Castro, P.M.L., 2012b. Co-metabolic 
degradation of chlorobenzene by the fluorobenzene degrading wild strain Labrys 
portucalensis. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegradation 72, 76–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.ibiod.2012.05.013.
Moreira, I.S., Ribeiro, A.R., Afonso, C.M., Tiritan, M.E., Castro, P.M., 2014. 
Enantioselective biodegradation of fluoxetine by the bacterial strain Labrys 
portucalensis F11. Chemosphere 111, 103–111. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chemosphere.2014.03.022.
Mullin, L., Jobst, K., DiLorenzo, R.A., Plumb, R., Reiner, E.J., Yeung, L.W.Y., Jogsten, I. 
E., 2020. Liquid chromatography-ion mobility-high resolution mass spectrometry for 
analysis of pollutants in indoor dust: identification and predictive capabilities. Anal. 
Chim. Acta 1125, 29–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2020.05.052.
Muter, O., 2023. Current trends in bioaugmentation tools for bioremediation: a critical 
review of advances and knowledge gaps. Microorganisms 11 (3). https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/microorganisms11030710.
Nzila, A., Razzak, S.A., Zhu, J., 2016. Bioaugmentation: an emerging strategy of 
industrial wastewater treatment for reuse and discharge. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public 
Health 13 (9). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph13090846.
Ober, C.K., K¨afer, F., Deng, J., 2022. Review of essential use of fluorochemicals in 
lithographic patterning and semiconductor processing. J. Micro/Nanopattern. 
Mater. Metrol. 21 (01). https://doi.org/10.1117/1.Jmm.21.1.010901.
Organtini, K.L., Rosnack, K.J., Hancock, P., 2023. Expanding the Range of PFAS in a 
Single Injection to Include Ultra Short Chains Using the Atlantis™ BEH™ C18 AX 
Mixed Mode Column. Waters Corporation. https://www.waters.com/content/dam/ 
waters/en/app-notes/2023/720008034/720008034-en.pdf (accessed 01/03/2024). 
¨Ozel Duygan, B.D., Gaille, C., Fenner, K., van der Meer, J.R., 2021. Assessing antibiotics 
biodegradation and effects at sub-inhibitory concentrations by quantitative 
microbial community deconvolution. Front. Environ. Sci. 9. https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fenvs.2021.737247.
Presentato, A., Lampis, S., Vantini, A., Manea, F., Dapra, F., Zuccoli, S., Vallini, G., 2020. 
On the ability of Perfluorohexane sulfonate (PFHxS) bioaccumulation by two 
Pseudomonas sp. strains isolated from PFAS-contaminated environmental matrices. 
Microorganisms 8 (1). https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms8010092.
Prevedouros, K., Cousins, I.T., Buck, R.C., Korzeniowski, S.H., 2006. Sources, fate and 
transport of perfluorocarboxylates. Environ. Sci. Technol. 40 (1), 32–44. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/es0512475.
Rios-Bonilla, K.M., Aga, D.S., Lee, J., Konig, M., Qin, W., Cristobal, J.R., AtillaGokcumen, G.E., Escher, B.I., 2024. Neurotoxic effects of mixtures of perfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFAS) at environmental and human blood concentrations. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 58 (38), 16774–16784. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.4c06017.
Shaw, D.M.J., Munoz, G., Bottos, E.M., Duy, S.V., Sauve, S., Liu, J., Van Hamme, J.D., 
2019. Degradation and defluorination of 6:2 fluorotelomer sulfonamidoalkyl betaine 
and 6:2 fluorotelomer sulfonate by Gordonia sp. strain NB4-1Y under sulfur-limiting 
conditions. Sci. Total Environ. 647, 690–698. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2018.08.012.
Taniyasu, S., Kannan, K., Horii, Y., Hanari, N., Yamashita, N., 2003. A survey of 
perfluorooctane sulfonate and related perfluorinated organic compounds in water, 
fish, birds, and humans from Japan. Environ. Sci. Technol. 37 (12), 2634–2639. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/es0303440.
Vieira, V.M., Hoffman, K., Shin, H.M., Weinberg, J.M., Webster, T.F., Fletcher, T., 2013. 
Perfluorooctanoic acid exposure and cancer outcomes in a contaminated 
community: a geographic analysis. Environ. Health Perspect. 121 (3), 318–323. 
https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1205829.
Yang, S.H., Shi, Y., Strynar, M., Chu, K.H., 2022. Desulfonation and defluorination of 6:2 
fluorotelomer sulfonic acid (6:2 FTSA) by Rhodococcus jostii RHA1: carbon and sulfur 
sources, enzymes, and pathways. J. Hazard. Mater. 423 (Pt A), 127052. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.127052.
Yi, L.B., Chai, L.Y., Xie, Y., Peng, Q.J., Peng, Q.Z., 2016. Isolation, identification, and 
degradation performance of a PFOA-degrading strain. Genet. Mol. Res. 15 (2). 
https://doi.org/10.4238/gmr.15028043.
Yu, Y., Zhang, K., Li, Z., Ren, C., Chen, J., Lin, Y.H., Liu, J., Men, Y., 2020. Microbial 
cleavage of C-F bonds in two C(6) per- and polyfluorinated compounds via reductive 
defluorination. Environ. Sci. Technol. 54 (22), 14393–14402. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.est.0c04483.
Yu, Y., Xu, F., Zhao, W., Thoma, C., Che, S., Richman, J.E., Jin, B., Zhu, Y., Xing, Y., 
Wackett, L., Men, Y., 2024. Electron bifurcation and fluoride efflux systems 
implicated in defluorination of perfluorinated unsaturated carboxylic acids by 
Acetobacterium spp. Sci. Adv. 10 (29), eado2957. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv. 
ado2957.
Zhang, S., Lu, X., Wang, N., Buck, R.C., 2016. Biotransformation potential of 6:2 
fluorotelomer sulfonate (6:2 FTSA) in aerobic and anaerobic sediment. Chemosphere 
154, 224–230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2016.03.062.
M.K. Wijayahena et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Science of the Total Environment 959 (2025) 178348 
10

