# 1-s2.0-S0048969724031437-main

**Source PDF**: 1-s2.0-S0048969724031437-main.pdf

---

## Page 1

Science of the Total Environment 932 (2024) 172996
Available online 6 May 2024
0048-9697/Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Anaerobic biodegradation of perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) and 
microbial community composition in soil amended with a dechlorinating 
culture and chlorinated solvents 
Michelle M. Lorah a,*, Ke He b, Lee Blaney b, Denise M. Akob c, Cassandra Harris c,1, 
Andrea Tokranov d, Zachary Hopkins e, Brian P. Shedd f 
a U.S. Geological Survey, Maryland-Delaware-D.C. Water Science Center, Baltimore, MD 21228, USA 
b University of Maryland Baltimore County, Department of Chemical, Biochemical, and Environmental Engineering, Baltimore, MD 21250, USA 
c U.S. Geological Survey, Geology, Energy, & Minerals Science Center, Reston, VA 20192, USA 
d U.S. Geological Survey, New England Water Science Center, Pembroke, NH 03275, USA 
e U.S. Geological Survey, Eastern Ecological Science Center, Kearneysville, WV 25430, USA 
f U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, U.S. DOD Environmental Programs Branch, Environmental Division, Headquarters, Washington, D.C. 20314, USA   
H I G H L I G H T S  
G R A P H I C A L  A B S T R A C T  
• PFOS biodegradation occurred in soil 
microcosms with added dehalogenating 
culture. 
• Initial presence of chlorinated volatile 
organic compounds enhanced PFOS 
removal. 
• Shorter chain perfluorinated sulfonates 
were minor PFOS metabolites. 
• Increased abundance of sulfate reducers 
was associated with PFOS removal. 
• Further research for a PFAS in situ 
bioremediation method is warranted.  
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Editor: Jay Gan  
Keywords: 
PFAS biodegradation 
Perfluorinated sulfonate 
PFAS contaminated soil 
Dehalogenating culture 
Sulfate reducers 
Chlorinated volatile organic compounds 
A B S T R A C T   
Perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS), one of the most frequently detected per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances 
(PFAS) occurring in soil, surface water, and groundwater near sites contaminated with aqueous film-forming 
foam (AFFF), has proven to be recalcitrant to many destructive remedies, including chemical oxidation. We 
investigated the potential to utilize microbially mediated reduction (bioreduction) to degrade PFOS and other 
PFAS through addition of a known dehalogenating culture, WBC-2, to soil obtained from an AFFF-contaminated 
site. A substantial decrease in total mass of PFOS (soil and water) was observed in microcosms amended with 
WBC-2 and chlorinated volatile organic compound (cVOC) co-contaminants — 46.4 ± 11.0 % removal of PFOS 
over the 45-day experiment. In contrast, perfluorooctanoate (PFOA) and 6:2 fluorotelomer sulfonate (6:2 FTS) 
concentrations did not decrease in the same microcosms. The low or non-detectable concentrations of potential 
metabolites in full PFAS analyses, including after application of the total oxidizable precursor assay, indicated 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: mmlorah@usgs.gov (M.M. Lorah).   
1 Present address: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Pesticide Programs, Environmental Fate and Effects Division, Washington, D.C., 20460, USA. 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Science of the Total Environment 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/scitotenv 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.172996 
Received 21 February 2024; Received in revised form 29 April 2024; Accepted 2 May 2024

## Page 2

Science of the Total Environment 932 (2024) 172996
2
that defluorination occurred to non-fluorinated compounds or ultrashort-chain PFAS. Nevertheless, additional 
research on the metabolites and degradation pathways is needed. Population abundances of known dehalores­
pirers did not change with PFOS removal during the experiment, making their association with PFOS removal 
unclear. An increased abundance of sulfate reducers in the genus Desulfosporosinus (Firmicutes) and Sulfur­
ospirillum (Campilobacterota) was observed with PFOS removal, most likely linked to initiation of biodegradation 
by desulfonation. These results have important implications for development of in situ bioremediation methods 
for PFAS and advancing knowledge of natural attenuation processes.   
1. Introduction 
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are widespread contam­
inants of emerging concern owing to the use of aqueous film-forming 
foams (AFFF) for firefighting at airports and military bases and the 
use of PFAS in a multitude of other consumer and industrial products 
and applications (Anderson et al., 2016; Glüge et al., 2020). Research 
over the past 20 years has provided increased evidence of the adverse 
effects of PFAS on human health (Rogers et al., 2021; Sunderland et al., 
2019) and ecosystems (Ankley et al., 2021). In 2024, the U.S. Environ­
mental Protection Agency (USEPA) established drinking water regula­
tions for five individual PFAS, including perfluorooctane sulfonate 
(PFOS) and perfluorooctanoate (PFOA) (USEPA, 2024). Maximum 
contaminant level goals of 0 nanograms per liter (ng/L) were set for 
PFOS and PFOA as likely carcinogens, and maximum contaminant levels 
of 4 ng/L were set for each compound in this final rule (USEPA, 2024). 
PFOS and PFOA are the most commonly reported PFAS, and PFOS 
concentrations in soil and groundwater are often significantly higher 
than PFOA levels (Johnson et al., 2022). PFOS is a major component and 
PFOA a minor byproduct of legacy AFFF produced by electrochemical 
fluorination, which was the dominant production process through the 
1990s (Weber et al., 2017; Schaefer et al., 2018). Amid concerns of the 
persistence, bioaccumulation, and toxicity of PFOS and PFOA, fluo­
rotelomerization became the primary method for PFAS production in 
the 2000s to replace PFOS-based electrochemical fluorination. While 
legacy fluorotelomer-based AFFF contained long-chain polyfluorinated 
precursors that could be transformed to PFOA (Harding-Marjanovic 
et al., 2015), more recent formulations primarily shifted towards C6 
short-chain length PFAS, such as 6:2 fluorotelomer sulfonate (6:2 FTS) 
(Buck et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2015). 
Interest in microbially mediated transformation reactions is driven 
by the need to understand the fate of complex PFAS mixtures after their 
release from source areas and to develop effective remediation and 
monitored natural attenuation methods for the wide range of PFAS 
compounds and concentrations (Newell et al., 2021b, 2021a). To date, 
much of the research has focused on precursor biotransformation 
through oxidative processes under aerobic conditions, which primarily 
results in transformation to apparently stable and mobile perfluoroalkyl 
acid (PFAA) end products (Zhang et al., 2021; Sharifan et al., 2021; 
Harding-Marjanovic et al., 2015). Although understanding precursor 
transformations is critical to defining the transport and risk of PFAS 
contamination in the environment, biodegradation of PFAAs is the ul­
timate goal for PFAS mitigation through bioremediation. Evidence of 
biodegradation (or mineralization) under aerobic or anaerobic condi­
tions is highly limited for PFAAs (Ochoa-Herrera et al., 2016; Park et al., 
2017; Sharifan et al., 2021). Reductive defluorination of PFAS can 
theoretically yield substantial energy to microbes (Bossert et al., 2003; 
Parsons et al., 2008), but little evidence of microbial degradation of 
perfluorinated compounds under anaerobic conditions existed prior to 
studies by Huang and Jaff´e (2019) and Yu et al. (2020). Huang and Jaff´e 
(2019) reported the first comprehensive study of PFOA and PFOS bio­
reductive defluorination using pure and enrichment cultures of Acid­
imicrobium sp. strain A6 (A6) (Huang et al., 2016; Huang and Jaff´e, 2018; 
Huang and Jaff´e, 2019). Production of fluoride, acetate, and short chain 
perfluorinated compounds occurred during anaerobic degradation of 
PFOS and PFOA by A6 (Huang and Jaff´e, 2019; Huang et al., 2022). 
Yu et al. (2020) reported anaerobic biodegradation by reductive 
defluorination for two unsaturated (carbon double bond) C6 carboxylic 
acids, one polyfluorinated and one perfluorinated, using the dehaloge­
nating culture KB-1. Formation of defluorinated transformation prod­
ucts and fluoride release were observed when lactate was supplied as an 
electron donor and the PFAS was the sole electron acceptor (Yu et al., 
2020). However, biodefluorination was not observed for saturated 
PFAS, including PFOA, in this study or a follow-on investigation with 13 
other fluorinated carboxylic acids (Yu et al., 2022). Reductive dehalo­
genating species or the reductive dehalogenase enzymes in the KB-1 
culture did not appear to be linked to microbial degradation of the un­
saturated PFAS, but degradation was only observed in the presence of 
live cultures (Yu et al., 2020). 
Additional research on anaerobic microbial reductive biodegrada­
tion of PFAS under in situ conditions is important due to the prevalence 
of anoxic conditions in subsurface plumes and groundwater discharge 
areas (Parsons et al., 2008; Kucharzyk et al., 2017). To investigate PFAS 
biotransformation and potential bioremediation applications using 
reductive degradation processes, we conducted laboratory experiments 
to determine if the presence of chlorinated volatile organic compound 
(cVOC) co-contaminants and known dehalorespirers could stimulate 
transformation of PFOS and other PFAS through reductive defluorina­
tion. We conducted anaerobic experiments with the previously estab­
lished, diverse dehalogenating culture, WBC-2 (Jones et al., 2006; Lorah 
Abbreviations 
AFFF 
aqueous film forming foam 
cVOC 
chlorinated volatile organic compound 
12DCA 
1,2-dichloroethane 
12DCE 
cis- and trans-1,2-dichloroethylene 
OTU 
operational taxonomic unit 
PFAA 
perfluoroalkyl acid 
PFAS 
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances 
PFBA 
perfluorobutanoate 
PFBS 
perfluorobutane sulfonate 
PFHxS 
perfluorohexane sulfonate 
PFOA 
perfluorooctanoate 
PFOS 
perfluorooctane sulfonate 
B-PFOS 
branched isomers of PFOS 
L-PFOS 
linear isomers of PFOS 
PFPeS 
perfluoropentane sulfonate 
6:2 FTS 
6:2 fluorotelomer sulfonate 
112TCA 1,1,2-trichloroethane 
TCE 
trichloroethylene 
TeCA 
1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane 
TOP 
total oxidizable precursor 
VC 
vinyl chloride  
M.M. Lorah et al.

## Page 3

Science of the Total Environment 932 (2024) 172996
3
et al., 2008), as well as native microorganisms from contaminated soils. 
WBC-2 was developed to degrade both saturated cVOCs, particularly 
1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane (TeCA), and unsaturated cVOCs, including 
trichloroethylene (TCE) and its daughter products (Lorah et al., 2008; 
Jones et al., 2006). Our objectives were to (1) determine if PFAS can be 
biodegraded under anoxic conditions and (2) add to the limited avail­
able data on microbial populations associated with PFAS degradation, 
including the potential role of dehalogenating and sulfate-reducing 
microbes. PFOS was selected as a primary perfluorinated compound 
because of its prevalence in legacy AFFF and negligible removal by 
oxidation-based treatment processes (Schaefer et al., 2018; Park et al., 
2016). Two additional compounds, 6:2 FTS and PFOA, were included in 
these experiments to identify the impacts, respectively, of a poly­
fluoroalkyl moiety adjacent to the sulfonate head group and of a per­
fluorinated carboxylate with comparable carbon chain length as PFOS, 
respectively, on biodegradation. 
2. Materials and methods 
2.1. Microcosm preparation and sampling 
Laboratory tests are summarized here, and the accompanying data 
release contains all experimental data (Lorah et al., 2024). Microcosms 
were prepared with soil obtained near a former fire-fighting training 
area at a military installation (Fort Drum, New York, USA) known to 
contain relatively low PFAS levels. Soil (fine/silty sand) was collected 
from a depth of 2.5 to 8.5 cm below land surface and transported to the 
laboratory on ice. Soil was passed through a 2-mm sieve in an anaerobic 
glove chamber and thoroughly mixed before use in experiments. 
Simulated groundwater was used to prepare a slurry with a water-tosoil ratio of 2:1 for the microcosms (Lorah et al., 2024). The simulated 
groundwater had a pH of 7.0 and contained 8.5 mg/L KH2PO4, 22 mg/L 
K2HPO4, 33 mg/L Na2HPO4, 10 mg/L Ca3(PO4)2, 1.25 mg/L 
FeCl3⋅6H2O, 100 mg/L (NH4)2SO4, and 25 mg/L MgSO4⋅7H2O. Micro­
cosms (Table S1 and Table 1) were constructed in an anaerobic chamber 
and in 164-mL glass serum bottles closed with crimped butyl stoppers 
for sacrificial sampling at each time point. Microcosms were incubated 
for 45 days in an anaerobic chamber at room temperature (22–23 ◦C). 
All microcosm treatments were prepared in duplicate and sacrificed for 
sampling at each time point (days 0, 24, and 45). 
The microcosms were amended to nominal aqueous-phase concen­
trations of 100 μg/L (0.20 μmol/L) PFOS, 50 μg/L (0.12 μmol/L) PFOA, 
and 50 μg/L (0.12 μmol/L) 6:2 FTS at the beginning of the experiment 
(day 0). Treatments were prepared with and without bioaugmentation 
with the WBC-2 dehalogenating culture (3.3 % v/v). Two PFASamended treatments were bioaugmented with WBC-2 — treatment 
WSEDT that also contained added cVOCs and treatment WSED that did 
not have added cVOCs (Table 1). WBC-2 was obtained from SiREM Lab 
(Guelph, Ontario, Canada). For the cVOC-amended treatments, micro­
cosms were only spiked at day 0, with nominal aqueous-phase concen­
trations of 1000 μg/L (6.0 μmol/L) TeCA and 100 μg/L (0.76 μmol/L) 
TCE. 
Two microcosm treatments were prepared without WBC-2, namely 
treatment SEDT amended with PFAS and cVOCs and a live control (LC) 
treatment. The LC treatment was unamended to provide a control for 
changes in the native microbial community due to incubation bottle 
effects. Sodium lactate was added to give 5 mM lactate to all soil 
microcosm treatments, except the LC treatment, as an electron donor to 
support reductive dehalogenation. A deionized water (DI) control 
without soil also was prepared with the PFAS and cVOCs to evaluate the 
amendment concentrations and potential abiotic losses over time that 
could be due to processes other than soil sorption, such as volatile losses 
or sorption to the bottle. 
2.2. Amended PFAS and cVOC analysis 
The microcosm slurries were centrifuged to obtain water and soil 
samples from each microcosm bottle for analysis of PFOS, PFOA, and 6:2 
FTS. Select microcosm water samples also were analyzed for a wider 
suite of 41 PFAS as described in Section 2.3. Detailed preparation and 
analytical protocols for PFOS, PFOA, and 6:2 FTS are described in the 
supplemental information (Text S1, Table S2, Fig. S1). Triplicate ana­
lyses were performed for each sample, and the mean concentration ±
standard deviation was reported (Lorah et al., 2024). For the water 
samples from the microcosms, the linear (L-PFOS) isomers of PFOS were 
quantified using an L-PFOS analytical standard, and the branched (BPFOS) isomers were determined using the integrated peak area for BPFOS with the calibration for L-PFOS. Standards were obtained to 
quantify both L-PFOS and B-PFOS in the soil samples; in particular, an LPFOS standard (Wellington Laboratories, Guelph, Ontario, Canada) and 
a mixed standard containing both L-PFOS and B-PFOS (Sigma-Aldrich) 
were used to generate separate L-PFOS and B-PFOS calibrations. For 
quality assurance, water samples from the DI treatment were rerun to 
quantify the aqueous-phase L-PFOS and B-PFOS concentrations 
(Table S3). The average L-PFOS concentration in the water was 2.5 times 
greater than the B-PFOS content, in agreement with the composition of 
the standard that was used to amend the microcosms with PFOS. 
The analytical standards of PFOS, PFOA, 6:2 FTS, and their masslabeled analogs, namely sodium perfluoro-1-[1,2,3,4-13C4]octane sul­
fonate (MPFOS), perfluoro-n-[1,2,3,4-13C4]octanoic acid (MPFOA), 
sodium 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluoro-[1,2-13C2]octane sulfonate (M2-6:2 
FTS), perfluoro-n-[13C8] octanoic acid (M8PFOA), and sodium per­
fluoro-1-[13C8] octane sulfonate (M8PFOS), were purchased from 
Wellington Laboratories (Guelph, Ontario, Canada). MPFOA, M2-6:2 
FTS, and MPFOS were used as internal standards to correct matrix ef­
fects during LC-MS/MS analysis, and M8PFOA and M8PFOS were used 
as surrogates to track analyte recovery during the extraction and 
cleanup processes. 
Replicate water and soil samples were collected for cVOC analysis 
from at least one of the duplicate microcosm bottles in a treatment set at 
each time step and analyzed by gas chromatography mass spectrometry, 
using a modified version of USEPA Method 542 (Majcher et al., 2007). 
Replicates were analyzed for 25 % of the samples collected, and the 
average relative percent difference was 7.80 % for detected constituents. 
Water samples (2 mL) were collected for methane analysis by gas 
chromatography with a flame ionization detector, using previously re­
ported methods (Majcher et al., 2007; Lorah et al., 2022), to evaluate 
redox conditions for selected microcosm bottles. 
2.3. PFAS mass balance and comprehensive PFAS analysis 
The concentrations of the amended compounds PFOS, PFOA, and 6:2 
FTS analyzed in the microcosm water and soil samples at each time point 
were converted to mass using the volume of water and mass of soil in 
each bottle, respectively (Table S1). The change in total mass of each 
PFAS (i.e., sum of PFAS mass in the water and soil) was determined over 
the experiment duration. The total mass was normalized using the initial 
mass measured at day 0 for each compound to compare changes among 
treatments. 
A full suite of 41 target PFAS was analyzed for select water samples 
Table 1 
Summary of microcosm treatments. Treatments contained soil mixed with 
simulated groundwater (1:2 ratio by volume), except treatment DI which did not 
contain soil.  
Treatment 
Soil 
Lactate 
WBC-2 
cVOCs 
PFAS 
WSEDT 
+
+
+
+
+
SEDT 
+
+
̶ 
+
+
WSED 
+
+
+
̶ 
+
LC 
+
̶ 
̶ 
̶ 
̶ 
DI 
̶ 
̶ 
̶ 
+
+
M.M. Lorah et al.

## Page 4

Science of the Total Environment 932 (2024) 172996
4
from treatments WSED and SEDT using two dilutions to achieve low 
detection levels for PFAS. The full PFAS analysis was done at the U.S. 
Geological Survey (USGS) with a direct injection isotope dilution 
method on an Orbitrap Exploris 120 liquid chromatograph with high 
resolution mass spectrometry, as described in Lorah et al. (2024). The 
detected concentrations and the sum of PFAS on molar and fluorine 
equivalent bases (Text S2 and Table S4) are summarized in Table S6 for 
these full PFAS analyses. The same select water samples from treatments 
WSED and SEDT were subjected to the total oxidizable precursor (TOP) 
assay to assess possible production of polyfluoroalkyl metabolites in the 
microcosms that could not be detected by the standard full suite analysis 
(Text S2). Differences in PFAS concentrations before and after the TOP 
assay are summarized in Tables S6 and S7. However, these calculations 
utilized post-TOP concentrations with exceedances of the highest cali­
bration point and, thus, the TOP assay results were primarily employed 
to determine the presence or absence of unknown metabolites in the two 
treatments. 
2.4. Microbial community analyses 
Microcosm slurry samples were collected for microbial community 
analysis after collection of liquid required for chemical analyses. Mi­
crobial communities at each sampling point were characterized using 
Illumina 16S rRNA gene iTag sequencing through the USGS Reston 
Microbiology Laboratory according to methods described in Mumford 
et al. (2020). In brief, DNA was extracted from the samples using the 
DNeasy PowerSoil kit (Qiagen, Inc., Hilden, Germany) according to the 
manufacturer’s protocols. Extracted DNA was quantified using the 
Quant-iT double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) High Sensitivity assay kit (Life 
Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer’s in­
structions. Genomic DNA was diluted to a final concentration of 10 ng/ 
μL using nuclease-free water (Ambion, Inc., Austin, TX) then shipped to 
Michigan State University’s Research Technology Support Facility 
(RTSF, East Lansing, MI) for Illumina 16S iTag sequencing. 
Amplicon libraries of the V4 hypervariable region of the 16S rRNA 
gene were prepared using dual indexed, Illumina compatible primers 
515f and 806r (Caporaso et al., 2012; Apprill et al., 2015; Parada et al., 
2016; Walters et al., 2016) following the protocols developed by the 
Patrick Schloss laboratory (Kozich et al., 2013). Following polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR), all products were batch normalized using Invi­
trogen SequalPrep DNA Normalization (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) 
plates, and products were recovered from the plate and pooled. The pool 
was quality controlled and quantified using a combination of Qubit 
dsDNA HS, Agilent 4200 TapeStation HS DNA1000, and Invitrogen 
Collibri Library Quantification qPCR assays. This pool was loaded onto 
an Illumina MiSeq Standard v2 flow cell, and sequencing was performed 
in a 2 × 250 base pair (bp) paired-end format using a 500-cycle v2 re­
agent cartridge. Custom sequencing primers were added to appropriate 
wells of the reagent cartridge as described in Kozich et al. (2013). Base 
calling was done by Illumina Real-Time Analysis (RTA) v1.18.54, and 
the RTA output was demultiplexed and converted to FastQ format with 
Illumina Bcl2fastq v2.20.0. 
Initial quality control, alignment, and taxonomic assignment of mi­
crobial sequence data were performed using mothur v1.43.0 according 
to the mothur MiSeq standard operating procedure (Schloss et al., 2009; 
Kozich et al., 2013; Schloss, 2021) and using the USGS Advanced 
Research Computing Yeti high-performance computing facility. Opera­
tional taxonomic units (OTUs) were generated based on a 97 % simi­
larity cutoff against the Silva 138 non-redundant database (Quast et al., 
2013; Yilmaz et al., 2014). Statistical and diversity analyses were per­
formed in R (R Core Team, 2015) using CORE components and the 
VEGAN, PHYLOSEQ, and DESeq2 packages (McMurdie and Holmes, 
2013; R Core Team, 2015; Oksanen et al., 2018; Oksanen et al., 2019; 
Love et al., 2014); and Prism version 9 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, 
CA) as described in the Supplemental Information. All mothur and R 
codes are provided in the Supplemental Information. Two samples that 
had <5000 reads, “LC Day 24.1_2” and “SEDT Day0.1_2,” were removed 
for the non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) analysis but 
retained for other analyses as only duplicates were available. Sequences 
are available from the NCBI Sequence Read Archive under BioProject 
PRJNA938174 and BioSample accession numbers SAMN33427333 
through SAMN33427372, and taxonomic assignment for all OTUs is 
available as a biom file in Lorah et al. (2024). 
3. Results and discussion 
3.1. PFOS concentrations and mass removal rates 
Aqueous-phase PFOS concentrations substantially declined from day 
0 to day 45 in the soil slurry microcosm treatments amended with PFAS 
and cVOCs, including the bioaugmented treatment WSEDT and the nonbioaugmented treatment SEDT (Fig. 1A). In contrast, aqueous-phase 
PFOS concentrations in treatment WSED, which was bioaugmented 
with WBC-2 but not amended with cVOCs, decreased from day 0 to day 
24 and then plateaued between days 24 and 45. Sorption to the soil 
partly accounted for the decrease in aqueous-phase PFOS concentrations 
in treatment WSEDT from day 24 to day 45, because PFOS levels in the 
soil increased during this period (Fig. 1B). However, mass balances of 
total PFOS in the microcosms indicate that sorption or other abiotic 
processes could not fully account for the decrease in PFOS mass in SEDT 
and WSEDT (Fig. 2 and Table 2). In the three soil treatments with added 
PFAS, about 20 % of the total mass PFOS was distributed in the soil on 
Fig. 1. Concentrations of PFOS (sum of linear and branched isomers) in 
microcosm (A) water and (B) soil samples. The reported concentrations are the 
mean of triplicate analyses of samples collected from duplicate microcosm 
bottles for each treatment. Error bars show standard deviation of mean values 
for duplicate microcosms. 
M.M. Lorah et al.

## Page 5

Science of the Total Environment 932 (2024) 172996
5
day 0, which included 2–4 % as B-PFOS and 16–18 % as L-PFOS (Fig. 2). 
The unamended LC treatment had PFOS concentrations that were below 
detection in all water (< 0.5 μg/L) and soil (<0.5 μg/kg) samples (data 
available in Lorah et al., 2024). 
The percent removal of total PFOS mass in the WSEDT treatment was 
substantially greater than observed in the other treatments and for 6:2 
FTS and PFOA (Table 2 and Fig. 3A). Total mass removal of PFOS in the 
WSEDT treatment, which included the WBC-2 dehalogenating culture 
and cVOCs, was 46.4 ± 11.0 % over the 45-day experiment. The SEDT 
treatment with added cVOCs but no WBC-2 culture also had a signifi­
cant, but lower, PFOS removal of 25.5 ± 6.6 % (Table 2). The first-order 
rate constants for PFOS mass removal were 0.0159 ± 0.0052 and 0.0075 
± 0.0021 d−1 in the WSEDT and SEDT microcosms, respectively, with 
corresponding half-lives of 48.8 ± 16.0 and 100.6 ± 28.0 d, respectively 
(Table 2). In contrast, the WSED treatment, which was amended with 
WBC-2 but not cVOCs, only had 11.5 ± 0.9 % mass removal of PFOS 
over the 45-day experiment. Although the initial PFOS mass removal in 
WSED (day 0 to 24) was approximately equal to the removal observed in 
the WSEDT treatment (Fig. 3A), PFOS concentrations did not continue to 
decrease in WSED after day 24, yielding an overall first-order rate 
constant of 0.0036 ± 0.00022 d−1 (Table 2). cVOC degradation and 
microbial community composition in the treatments assisted in evalu­
ating the differences in PFOS removal, as discussed in Sections 3.4 and 
3.5, respectively. 
Higher concentrations (Fig. S2) and mass (Fig. 2) of L-PFOS were 
observed in the soil compared to B-PFOS, as expected due to the greater 
proportion of L-PFOS in the PFOS solution used to amend the micro­
cosms. The masses of L-PFOS and B-PFOS that were measured in the soil 
samples were linearly correlated (r2 = 0.82), indicating that sorption did 
not greatly differ between the two isomers for these test conditions 
(Fig. S3). Bio-uptake, which includes contaminant partitioning into 
phospholipid layers of cell membranes and incorporation into biofilm 
matrices of extracellular polymeric substances, has been measured for 
PFOS in laboratory and field studies (Fitzgerald et al., 2018; Munoz 
et al., 2018). Amendment of WBC-2 did not seem to affect sorption, 
however, because the change in PFOS soil mass in the treatments with 
(WSEDT) and without (SEDT) added culture was not significant (MannWhitney U = 8.0, p = 0.05) (Fig. 2B). Formation of iron complexes has 
been identified as a factor that potentially affects aqueous-phase PFOS 
concentrations at acidic pH (Park et al., 2018), but the solution pH was 
>7.0 in our experiment (Table S1). 
3.2. PFOA and 6:2 FTS concentrations and mass removal 
In contrast to the high PFOS mass removal in WSEDT and SEDT, no 
consistent concentration (Figs. S3 and S4) or mass removal (Fig. 3B and 
C) trends were identified for PFOA or 6:2 FTS. The highest PFOA percent 
removal was 11.0 ± 10.0 % in treatment WSEDT (Table 2). The change 
in 6:2 FTS total mass was only about 2 % in the WSEDT and WSED 
treatments (Table 2). The greatest mass change for 6:2 FTS was observed 
in treatment SEDT, which was amended with cVOCs but not the WBC-2 
culture — a 19.1 ± 1.4 % increase in mass was calculated from day 0 to 
day 45. However, the apparent increase in 6:2 FTS mass in SEDT is 
within the range of decrease observed in the water of the DI controls, 
and the difference between the normalized 6:2 FTS mass in the SEDT and 
DI treatments over the incubation period was not significant (MannWhitney U = 17.5, p = 0.05). PFOA and 6:2 FTS had similar mass dis­
tributions between the soil and water, with generally 15 % or less of the 
mass in the soil (Figs. S4 and S5); this outcome was expected based on 
the similar log Dow values for PFOA (1.58) and 6:2 FTS (1.54) at pH 7 
(MarvinSketch, 2018). 
Fig. 2. PFOS in microcosms shown as (A) mass and (B) percent mass distri­
bution of L-PFOS and B-PFOS in water and soil samples for each time step 
indicated in days. Error bars show standard deviation of mean values for 
duplicate microcosms. 
Table 2 
Percent mass removal for PFOA, 6:2 FTS, and PFOS, and first-order mass removal rate coefficients (k) for PFOS. The removal efficiencies were calculated using the 
mean total mass from water and soil analyses for days 0 and 45; negative values indicated an increase in mass over time. PFOS (sum L-PFOS and B-PFOS) removal 
percentages and rates for treatments WSEDT, SEDT, and WSED were adjusted by subtracting the percent removal in the DI treatment. A DI correction was not applied to 
the PFOA and 6:2 FTS removal rates because removal was less than observed in the DI treatment or an increase in mass over time occurred compared to the DI 
treatment.  
Treatment 
PFOA % removal 
6:2 FTS % removal 
PFOS % removal 
L-PFOS % removal 
B-PFOS % removal 
PFOS k, per day 
PFOS t1/2, days 
PFOS R2 
DI  
18.5 ± 8.2  
22.2 ± 0.3  
2.9 ± 2.6  
2.9  
2.9 
– 
– 
– 
WSEDT  
11.0 ± 10.0  
−1.9 ± 2.7  
46.4 ± 11.0  
45.4  
49.3 
0.0159 ± 0.0052 
48.8 ± 16.0 
0.986 
SEDT  
−9.2 ± 5.8  
−19.1 ± 1.4  
25.5 ± 6.6  
25.0  
27.1 
0.0075 ± 0.0021 
100.6 ± 28.0 
0.790 
WSED  
9.2 ± 3.1  
−2.3 ± 0.9  
11.5 ± 0.9  
11.3  
12.2 
0.0036 ± 0.00022 
191.6 ± 11.8 
0.436 
[k, removal rate coefficient; t1/2, half-life; R2, coefficient of determination]. 
M.M. Lorah et al.

## Page 6

Science of the Total Environment 932 (2024) 172996
6
3.3. Comprehensive PFAS analysis and possible metabolites 
For the treatments where PFOS mass reductions were observed, 
water samples were analyzed to evaluate the sum of PFAS at the 
beginning and end of the incubation period to evaluate production of 
potential metabolites (Table S5). The summed concentrations of PFAS 
and fluorine equivalents in the bioaugmented treatment WSEDT 
decreased by about 29 % in the water over the 45-day experiment 
(Table S5). The decrease in total PFAS and fluorine equivalents in 
WSEDT over time in the full PFAS analysis supports the mass removal of 
PFOS determined by the targeted analyses of the amended PFAS and 
shows that the PFOS removal was not balanced by production of PFAA 
metabolites (Table S5). Sequential reductive defluorination of PFOS 
could produce shorter chain perfluorinated sulfonates, and concentra­
tions of perfluorohexane sulfonate (PFHxS), perfluoropentane sulfonate 
(PFPeS), and perfluorobutane sulfonate (PFBS) did increase in the 
WSEDT water samples over the 45-day incubation period. However, 
their concentrations were low, with the combined increase in PFHxS, 
PFPeS, and PFBS concentrations accounting for only 0.22 % of the 
decrease in PFOS concentrations in the WSEDT microcosm water. 
Metabolite concentrations measured in other studies with PFOS have 
also been low. PFBS was reported as a minor PFOS biodegradation 
product by A6 under anaerobic conditions (Huang and Jaff´e, 2019). 
Perfluorobutanoate (PFBA) was the only other fluorinated intermediate 
previously identified for anaerobic PFOS biodegradation (Huang and 
Jaff´e, 2019) and was tentatively identified at low concentrations (<2.0 
nmoles/L) in the WSEDT and SEDT treatments (Table S5). 
The TOP assay results indicated that the PFOS removal in the WSEDT 
water samples over the 45-day incubation could not be accounted for by 
production of metabolites that could be converted to PFAAs during the 
TOP assay, although verification of metabolite production was compli­
cated by the 6:2 FTS also amended to the microcosms (Text S2; Tables S6 
and S7). Both the WSEDT and SEDT microcosms showed an increase in 
perfluorinated carboxylates that could result from 6:2 FTS oxidation 
during the TOP assay (Weber et al., 2017; Hamid et al., 2020) (Tables S6 
and S7). Interestingly, the predominant difference in the post-TOP assay 
results for the two microcosm treatments was that PFBA concentrations 
were high for SEDT water samples but were not detected in the WSEDT 
water samples (Table S6). PFBA is a possible product of 6:2 FTS oxida­
tion but has also been reported as a product of PFOS anaerobic 
biodegradation (Huang and Jaff´e, 2019). 
Substantial defluorination of PFOS in the WSEDT treatment was 
indicated by the combined evidence of significant total mass removal of 
PFOS documented by water and soil analyses of the microcosms and the 
low concentrations of metabolites detected in the water by full PFAS 
analyses. However, the full PFAS analysis did not include measurement 
of ultrashort-chain PFAS containing less than four carbon atoms. In 
addition, fluoride analyses were not conducted for this experiment 
because of relatively high detection limits for fluoride compared to the 
low fluoride concentrations that could be released from the PFOS con­
centrations that were amended. The difficulty in measuring fluoride 
release in biodegradation experiments with environmentally relevant 
PFAS concentrations has been acknowledged by other researchers 
(Huang and Jaff´e, 2019). 
3.4. Biodegradation of cVOCs 
To stimulate reductive dehalogenation, cVOCs were added to one 
treatment with the added WBC-2 culture (WSEDT) and to one treatment 
that only contained the native microbial community (SEDT). The chlo­
rinated alkane TeCA was added at day 0 at a nominal aqueous-phase 
concentration of 1000 μg/L (6.0 μmol/L), along with TCE at 100 μg/L 
(0.76 μmol/L). Reductive dechlorination of TeCA by WBC-2 simulta­
neously occurs by two pathways — hydrogenolysis to 1,1,2-trichloro­
ethane 
(112TCA) 
and 
1,2-dichloroethane 
(12DCA) 
and 
dichloroelimination to cis- and trans-1,2-dichloroethylene (12DCE) with 
subsequent hydrogenolysis to vinyl chloride (VC) (Lorah et al., 2008; 
Jones et al., 2006; Lorah et al., 2015; Manchester et al., 2012). Complete 
dechlorination of these intermediates produces ethene and sometimes 
ethane. TCE, which can also be produced by abiotic degradation of 
TeCA, undergoes hydrogenolysis by WBC-2 to 12DCE, VC, and ethene. 
Methane was detected in microcosm samples from SEDT, WSED, and 
WSEDT, verifying that the anaerobic conditions needed for complete 
reductive dehalogenation of the cVOCs occurred in the microcosms 
(Fig. S9). The methane concentrations were about 1400 μg/L by day 45 
in microcosms with and without WBC-2 (Fig. S9). 
Fig. 3. Change in total mass of (A) PFOS, (B) PFOA, and (C) 6:2 FTS in 
microcosm samples, calculated from the sum of the mass in the water and the 
soil at each time point (M) and normalized to the total mass at day 0 (M0). Error 
bars show standard deviation of the mean for duplicate bottles; some error bars 
are too small to be seen. 
M.M. Lorah et al.

## Page 7

Science of the Total Environment 932 (2024) 172996
7
In the WSEDT treatment, the aqueous-phase concentrations of TeCA 
and TCE decreased to below detection limits (2.5 μg/L, or 0.015 μmol/L) 
by day 24 with little accumulation of chlorinated daughter products. 
The maximum total molar concentration of the chlorinated daughter 
products in the WSEDT microcosms was more than an order of magni­
tude lower than the initial TeCA and TCE concentrations (Fig. 4). Soil 
samples from the WSEDT microcosms also had TeCA concentrations 
below detection by day 24 (Fig. S8). The low accumulation of chlori­
nated daughter products indicated that WBC-2 rapidly biodegraded the 
cVOCs to non-chlorinated end products. Therefore, no inhibition of 
WBC-2 by the relatively high PFAS concentrations amended to these 
microcosms was apparent, consistent with a recent study of reductive 
dechlorination by a different dechlorinating consortium in the presence 
of PFAA concentrations up to 38.7 mg/L (Hnatko et al., 2023). 
In the SEDT treatment, the decrease in TeCA and TCE concentrations 
with a concomitant increase in chlorinated daughter products indicated 
reductive dechlorination by the native microbial community (Fig. 4B). 
However, cVOC removal was incomplete in the SEDT treatment during 
the 45-day experiment. TeCA concentrations in SEDT were below the 
detection limit of 0.015 μmol/L by day 45, rather than by day 24 as 
observed in the WSEDT microcosms, and 12DCA was the dominant 
daughter product (Fig. 4). 12DCA reached aqueous-phase concentra­
tions of nearly 2.0 μmol/L by day 45 (SEDT, Fig. 4B). Although 12DCE 
was also produced in SEDT by day 24, continued degradation to VC did 
not occur. 
A link between cVOC degradation and PFOS transformation was 
inferred by the fact that removal of both contaminants was greatest in 
the WSEDT microcosms; furthermore, PFOS removal was lowest in the 
WSED microcosms, which did not contain added cVOCs. Although no 
known cVOC contamination occurred in the area where the microcosms 
soil was collected, TCE, 12DCE, and 12DCA were detected in microcosm 
samples from the two treatments that were not amended with cVOCs, 
WSED and LC (Fig. S8). Detection of cVOCs was sporadic and low in 
these treatments but suggested exposure of the native microbial com­
munity to halogenated organic contaminants prior to the reported 
experiments. 
3.5. Microbial communities associated with PFOS biodegradation 
Microbial community dynamics were assessed in the LC, SED, WSED, 
and SEDT microcosms at days 0, 24, and 45. NMDS analysis with a BrayCurtis dissimilarity matrix showed differences in community structure 
between the different treatments and times (Fig. S10). Permutational 
multivariate analysis of variance showed that microbial community 
structure significantly differed by treatment (adonis2, p = 0.002, r2 =
0.201) but not by time (adonis2, p = 0.806, r2 = 0.0817). The WSEDT 
samples were most similar to each another and showed shifts along 
NMDS axis 1 with time. This outcome may be due to the addition of both 
the WBC-2 consortium and cVOCs to the soil slurry, which provided a 
known dechlorinating population along with a substrate to support 
microbial metabolism. Further, the native soil community might not 
have acclimated to the highly anaerobic conditions and addition of 
lactate in the microcosms. WSEDT microcosms at day 24 had the highest 
number of reads and OTUs and the highest diversity based on the Chao1, 
Shannon, and Inverse Simpson’s diversity index (Table S8 and Fig. S11). 
Shifts in microbial community structure were supported by differ­
ences in the taxonomic composition of the communities in the WSEDT, 
SEDT, and WSED microcosms (discussed further below, Fig. S12). The 
WSEDT and WSED treatments had the most phyla detected at >1 % 
relative abundance, with 12 and 13 different phyla, respectively 
detected across all sampling times. In contrast, SEDT only had 6 phyla 
detected at >1 % relative abundance across the time points. The taxo­
nomic composition of replicate microcosms was variable suggesting that 
the source soil had a high level of microbial heterogeneity. 
Firmicutes was the most abundant phylum in all three treatments 
and the only phylum detected at all time points (Fig. S12). From day 0 to 
45, Firmicutes had a significant log2 fold increase (p-adjusted <0.05, 
DESeq2 analysis at the phyla-level) in the SEDT microcosms, but no 
significant log2 fold change was observed for Firmicutes in the WSEDT 
or WSED microcosms over the same timeframe. In the WSEDT micro­
cosms, two Firmicutes genera, Anaeromusa-Anaeroarcus and Strepto­
coccus, had significant log2 fold increases (p-adjusted <0.05, DESeq2 
analysis at the genus-level) from day 0 to 45. Two Firmicutes genera had 
significant log2 fold changes in the WSED microcosms: Sporomusa 
decreased while unclassified Clostridiaceae significantly increased from 
day 0 to 45 (p-adjusted <0.05, DESeq2 analysis at the genus-level). 
Significant log2 fold increases were seen from day 0 to 45 for six 
genera in the SEDT microcosms: unclassified Sporomusaceae; Rumini­
clostridium; Pelosinus; Clostridium sensu stricto 12; uncultured Firmicutes; 
and Desulfosporosinus (p-adjusted <0.05, DESeq2 analysis at the genuslevel). 
The Firmicutes phylum includes facultative and strict anaerobic 
strains, many of which are spore formers and capable of degrading 
organic contaminants. Sporomusa are lactate-fermenting anaerobes, and 
several strains are known to degrade organic compounds and accumu­
late acetate (Amano et al., 2018; Sanchez-Andrea et al., 2018; Moe et al., 
2012). Possibly, the Sporomusa-related OTUs in the WSED microcosms 
decreased due to competition with other populations in WBC-2 and 
increased in SEDT due to an increase in native soil OTUs with the 
addition of lactate. The increase in Pelosinus in the SEDT microcosms 
could be related to the ability of strains in this genus to tolerate or 
Fig. 4. Molar concentrations of chlorinated volatile organic compounds 
(cVOCs) measured in water samples from microcosm treatments (A) WSEDT 
and (B) SEDT, which had 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane (TeCA) and trichloroethy­
lene (TCE) added at day 0. Note, the concentration scales for the daughter 
compounds, 1,1,2-trichloroethane (112TCA), 1,2-dichloroethane (12DCA), 1,2dichloroethylene (12DCE), and vinyl chloride (VC), differ between the WSEDT 
and SEDT treatments. Estimated concentrations below the reporting limit are 
indicated with “J”. Error bars show standard deviation of the mean for dupli­
cate SEDT bottles; some error bars are too small to be seen. 
M.M. Lorah et al.

## Page 8

Science of the Total Environment 932 (2024) 172996
8
degrade cVOCs based on previous isolations from chlorinated solventcontaminated water (Moe et al., 2012). Members of the Pelosinus 
genus are also common in subsurface environments where they are 
linked to anaerobic metal reduction (Ray et al., 2018). 
Desulfosporosinus, a known sulfate-reducer in the Firmicutes phylum, 
showed the greatest change over time based on relative abundance in 
the treatments that had the highest PFOS removal, WSEDT and SEDT 
(Fig. 5A and B, respectively). However, the Desulfosporosinus genus only 
had a significant log2 fold increase from days 0 to 45 in the SEDT mi­
crocosms (Table S8). The lack of significance for Desulfosporosinus using 
DESeq2 in the WSEDT microcosms was likely due to differences in the 
replicate bottles, which also showed differences in PFOS mass. Desulfo­
sporosinus relative abundance also did not significantly change based on 
DESeq2 in the WSED microcosms. In the WSEDT microcosms, the 
Campilobacterota genus Sulfurospirillum, which includes known sulfatereducers, also increased in relative abundance. Members of the phylum 
Campilobacterota markedly increased in relative abundance over time 
from 0.01 % at day 0 to ~22 % at day 45 in the WSEDT microcosms 
(Fig. S12). Further, Sulfurospirillum strains are known to be able to 
partially dechlorinate tetrachloroethene and TCE to 12DCE (Fig. 5A). 
Importantly, this sulfur-reducing genus did not increase in population 
abundance in the WSED microcosm treatment, which contained the 
same soil slurry as WSEDT but did not show overall PFOS removal 
(Table 2). 
The Chloroflexi were the second most abundant phyla in the WSEDT 
and WSED microcosms, but their abundance decreased from day 0 to 45, 
likely reflecting changes in the WBC-2 community composition during 
the incubation. However, no significant log2 fold change was observed 
for Chloroflexi at the phyla-level in the WSEDT or SEDT microcosms 
from day 0 to 45 (Table S9). Interestingly, Chloroflexi were not detected 
in the WSED bottles at day 24, but PFOS degradation was observed from 
day 0 to 24. Chloroflexi increased in relative abundance to above 
detection at day 45 in the WSED bottles (Fig. S12), resulting in a 
significant log2 fold increase (p-adjusted >0.05, DESeq2 analysis at the 
phyla-level, Table S9). At the genus-level for WSED microcosms, a single 
OTU within the Chloroflexi had a significant log2 fold increase; this OTU 
was within the candidate phylum Dormibacteraeota (formerly AD3 
clade). Candidate phylum Dormibacteraeota has no known cultured 
representatives to provide information on their potential function but is 
regularly found in subsurface soil microbiomes and has genetic traits 
with the potential for life in oligotrophic environments (Brewer et al., 
2019). WSEDT had two Chloroflexi OTUs with significant log2 fold 
changes: the unclassified TK10 clade had a significant log2 fold 
decrease; and an OTU in the Anaerolineaceae family had a significant 
log2 fold increase (p-adjusted >0.05, DESeq2 analysis at the genuslevel). No significant log2 fold changes were seen for Chloroflexi 
OTUs in the SEDT treatments. The Chloroflexi phylum includes mem­
bers of Dehalococcoides and Dehalogenimonas, two genera in the WBC-2 
culture capable of complete dehalorespiration of chlorinated ethenes 
(Hendrickson et al., 2002; Duhamel and Edwards, 2006; Ewald et al., 
2007; Key et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2020; Chen et al., 
2022). Given that WBC-2 was added to both the WSEDT and WSED 
microcosms, it was surprising that these organisms were minor pop­
ulations in the microcosms and that neither genus had significant log2 
fold changes over time. The complete biodegradation of cVOCs before 
day 24 in WSED and WSEDT could account for the lack of change in 
Dehalococcoides and Dehalogenimonas, but PFOS removal continued in 
WSEDT through day 45. Thus, the original hypothesis that enhancing 
reductive dechlorination could also enhance reductive defluorination 
was not verified by data showing an increase in well-known dehalor­
espirers. The dehalogenating Chloroflexi were potentially sensitive to 
the PFAS, but the concentrations amended to the microcosms were well 
below the 38.7 mg/L threshold reported as inhibitory for another 
dehalogenating consortium (Hnatko et al., 2023). 
Fig. 5. Microbial community composition at the genus level for populations with >1 % relative abundance in the microcosm treatments (A) WSEDT, (B) SEDT, and 
(C) WSED. Results are shown for each duplicate microcosm bottle at each time step. Note that sample SEDT Day 0_2 had <5000 reads. The biom file of taxonomic 
assignment of all operational taxonomic units (OTUs) can be found in Lorah et al. (2024). 
M.M. Lorah et al.

## Page 9

Science of the Total Environment 932 (2024) 172996
9
4. Conclusions and environmental implications 
Despite the voluntary phase-out of PFOS manufacturing in the 
United States that began in 2000, PFOS remains one of the most 
frequently detected and most concentrated PFAS in surface water and 
groundwater near AFFF sites and elsewhere (Zhang et al., 2016; 
McMahon et al., 2022; East et al., 2021; Johnson et al., 2022). Biore­
mediation has filled a critical role for in situ treatment of chlorinated 
organic contaminants, and our results have important implications for 
similar development of in situ treatment methods for PFAS and for 
advancing knowledge of natural attenuation processes (Newell et al., 
2021a, 2021b). We showed evidence of reductive biodefluorination 
with (1) removal rates quantified by PFOS mass balance between the 
water and soil over time and (2) indication of defluorination to nonfluorinated compounds or ultrashort-chain PFAS by the low or nondetectable concentrations of potential metabolites in the full PFAS 
analysis and the TOP assay. Furthermore, the association of PFOS 
degradation with cVOC biodegradation and increased abundance of 
some microbial populations associated with cVOC biodegradation 
indicated a biological removal process for PFOS. The lack of removal of 
6:2 FTS and PFOA in the same treatments confirmed that the biodeg­
radation pathways were unique to PFOS, a compound that has previ­
ously proven difficult to transform through abiotic and biotic processes 
(Sharifan et al., 2021). Importantly, the PFOS biodegradation reported 
here was the same for the linear and branched isomers of PFOS 
(Table 2), whereas abiotic degradation of PFOS typically results in 
minimal changes to linear isomers compared to branched forms (Patch 
et al., 2022; Ochoa-Herrera et al., 2008). 
The high rate of PFOS biodegradation observed with addition of the 
WBC-2 anaerobic dehalogenating culture and cVOCs builds on the only 
other culture, namely enrichments with A6, reported to be capable of 
reductive biodefluorination of PFOS under environmentally relevant 
conditions (Huang and Jaff´e, 2019; Jaff´e et al., 2021; Sima et al., 2023). 
In a recent study using gamma irradiation to emulate reductive 
defluorination, PFOS degraded more readily than the short-chain per­
fluorinated sulfonates, PFHxS and PFBS (Patch et al., 2022). Lower 
carbon‑fluorine (C–F) bond energies have previously been calculated 
for long-chain PFAS, and Patch et al. (2022) theorized that the rotation 
of the longer helical chain of PFOS can more readily expose the C–F 
bond to reactive species. Our results support the conclusion by Patch 
et al. (2022) that reductive defluorination is the best approach for PFOS 
treatment, rather than oxidation methods, but we provided additional 
evidence that such reductive defluorination could be biotically ach­
ieved. The overall degradation with gamma irradiation was 61 ± 1 % at 
pH 7 for 1.9 mg/L PFOS (Patch et al., 2022) compared 46.4 ± 11.0 % 
PFOS removal with the WBC-2 bioaugmented experiment reported here 
(Table 2). 
The increased abundance of sulfate reducers in the genus Desulfo­
sporosinus 
(Firmicutes) 
and 
Sulfurospirillum 
(Campilobacterota) 
observed with PFOS biodegradation in our experiments was likely 
linked to the importance of reduction of the sulfur-containing head 
group to initiate biodegradation by desulfonation, as noted in biodeg­
radation studies with 6:2 FTS and other sulfonates (Yang et al., 2022; 
Shaw et al., 2019). The important role of anaerobic desulfonation by 
sulfate reducers, including Firmicutes, has recently been shown for 
biodegradation of ubiquitous natural organosulfur compounds (Bur­
richter et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2020). PFOS has often been cited as highly 
recalcitrant due to the protective nature of the sulfonate head group, but 
removal of this functional group or breaking a C–F bond greatly in­
creases the susceptibility of the fluorine atoms on the remaining helical 
carbon chain to reaction (Zhang et al., 2013; Battye et al., 2022). The 
apparent lack of desulfonation of 6:2 FTS, which is structurally similar to 
PFOS, in our experiment was surprising, but the lower amended con­
centration of 6:2 FTS might have limited or obscured 6:2 FTS degrada­
tion compared to PFOS. 
Sulfate-reducers may play a more direct role in reductive 
defluorination of PFOS, as they do for other halogenated organics, and 
therefore warrant additional study. Desulfosporosinus spp. were also a 
component of the microbial community that increased over time in in­
cubations of A6 enrichments with PFOS or PFHxS but not PFOA (Huang 
and Jaff´e, 2019; Jaff´e et al., 2021). In addition to the presence of sulfate 
reducers noted in laboratory experiments with PFAS, a field study in 
groundwater at a fire-fighting training area found a strong positive 
correlation between C4-C7 PFAS concentrations and the distribution of 
sulfate reducers in the genus Desulfococcus (Desulfobacterota) (O’Carroll 
et al., 2020). In another field study at a site with both PFAS and a 
mixture of cVOCs, including chlorinated methane, ethanes, and TCE and 
other ethenes, correlations were not observed between PFAS levels and 
sulfate reducers or known dehalorespirers (Tang et al., 2022). However, 
denitrifying conditions predominated at this site, and cVOC reductive 
dechlorination was incomplete. 
In anaerobic PFAS biodegradation experiments with the KB-1 
dehalogenating culture (Yu et al., 2020), neither an increased abun­
dance of sulfur reducers nor Dehalococcoides (Chloroflexi), the primary 
dehalorespirer in KB-1, was observed. However, those experiments did 
not include PFOS or other fully saturated sulfonates (Yu et al., 2020). 
The lack of association between PFAS degradation and known dech­
lorinating populations in our study with WBC-2 or in the study with KB-1 
(Yu et al., 2020) may indicate their lack of involvement in PFAS 
reductive defluorination. Alternatively, low population abundances 
could enable reductive defluorination activity. Notably, complete cVOC 
degradation occurred in the WSEDT treatment by day 24 when the 
population abundance of known dechlorinating species was low 
(Fig. S12, Table S9); thus, the involvement of known dechlorinating 
species in PFOS degradation cannot be ruled out. Other studies have 
shown that low populations of dehalorespirers, such as Dehalococcoides 
can drive critical reductive dechlorination reactions (Underwood et al., 
2022; Clark et al., 2018). 
A microbial consortium is likely required to facilitate biodegradation 
of PFOS and other fluorinated compounds, in a manner similar to the 
different species that directly or indirectly facilitate reaction steps for 
chlorinated organic compounds, such as TCE and TeCA (Jones et al., 
2006; Manchester et al., 2012; Yan et al., 2016), chlorobenzenes (Kurt 
and Spain, 2013; Chow et al., 2020), and polychlorinated biphenyls 
(Payne et al., 2013). The apparent association between degradation of 
PFOS, a fluorinated alkane, and the chlorinated alkane dechlorination 
pathway for TeCA that led to accumulation of 12DCA in the SEDT 
treatment is intriguing. It is possible that addition of WBC-2 and TeCA 
was successful in stimulating PFOS defluorination, as opposed to the 
incomplete degradation observed in SEDT, because of the higher pop­
ulations of species capable of complete degradation of saturated alkanes. 
WBC-2 is maintained to keep both alkane and alkene dechlorination 
pathways active and contains a wide diversity of organisms that may 
harbor unknown dehalogenases (Molenda et al., 2016). Additional 
testing of the dehalogenating populations in the WBC-2 culture during 
PFOS degradation, along with identification of potential metabolites and 
fluoride measurements, could better define degradation pathways. 
Metabolite identification linked to associated microbial populations is 
critical for defining degradation pathways and clarifying the apparent 
preference for PFOS in this study. Future tests could include individual 
amendments of PFOS and 6:2 FTS at the same molar concentrations. 
Although addition of cVOCs with WBC-2 appeared to stimulate the 
greatest PFOS removal in the reported experiments, the fact that PFOS 
degradation continued long after cVOCs were degraded is promising and 
suggests that further definition of the microbial populations involved in 
PFOS degradation will allow development of bioremediation methods 
without cVOC addition. 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.172996. 
M.M. Lorah et al.

## Page 10

Science of the Total Environment 932 (2024) 172996
10
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Michelle M. Lorah: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft, Visualization, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Formal 
analysis, Conceptualization. Ke He: Writing – review & editing, Formal 
analysis, Data curation. Lee Blaney: Writing – review & editing, Formal 
analysis, Data curation. Denise M. Akob: Writing – review & editing, 
Writing – original draft, Visualization, Formal analysis, Data curation. 
Cassandra Harris: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Investigation, 
Formal analysis, Data curation. Andrea Tokranov: Writing – review & 
editing, Formal analysis, Data curation. Zachary Hopkins: Writing – 
review & editing, Formal analysis, Data curation. Brian P. Shedd: Re­
sources, Funding acquisition. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Data availability 
All data and analysis code are available in the Supplemental Infor­
mation and in a data release (Lorah et al., 2024). 
Acknowledgements 
This project was supported by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) 
through the Environmental Health Program of the Ecosystem Mission 
Area and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Baltimore District. We thank 
Scott Forbes, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, for assistance collecting 
field samples. We also thank Carol Morel, currently with the USGS Na­
tional Climate Adaptation Science Center, for assistance in experiment 
preparation and sampling. 
Any use of trade, firm, or product names is for descriptive purposes 
only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Government. The 
authors declare no competing financial interest. 
References 
Amano, N., Yamamuro, A., Miyahara, M., Kouzuma, A., Abe, T., Watanabe, K., 2018. 
Methylomusa anaerophila gen. nov., sp nov., an anaerobic methanol-utilizing 
bacterium isolated from a microbial fuel cell. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 68, 
1118–1122. https://doi.org/10.1099/ijsem.0.002635. 
Anderson, R.H., Long, G.C., Porter, R.C., Anderson, J.K., 2016. Occurrence of select 
perfluoroalkyl substances at U.S. air Force aqueous film-forming foam release sites 
other than fire-training areas: Field-validation of critical fate and transport 
properties. Chemosphere 150, 678–685. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chemosphere.2016.01.014. 
Ankley, G.T., Cureton, P., Hoke, R.A., Houde, M., Kumar, A., Kurias, J., Lanno, R., 
McCarthy, C., Newsted, J., Salice, C.J., Sample, B.E., Sepúlveda, M.S., Steevens, J., 
Valsecchi, S., 2021. Assessing the ecological risks of per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances: current state-of-the science and a proposed path forward. Environ. 
Toxicol. Chem. 40, 564–605. https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.4869. 
Apprill, A., McNally, S., Parsons, R., Weber, L., 2015. Minor revision to V4 region SSU 
rRNA 806R gene primer greatly increases detection of SAR11 bacterioplankton. 
Aquat. Microb. Ecol. 75 (2), 129–137. https://doi.org/10.3354/ame01753. 
Battye, N.J., Patch, D.J., Roberts, D.M.D., O’Connor, N.M., Turner, L.P., Kueper, B.H., 
Hulley, M.E., Weber, K.P., 2022. Use of a horizontal ball mill to remediate per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances in soil. Sci. Total Environ. 835, 155506 https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.155506. 
Bossert, I.D., H¨aggblom, M.M., Young, L.Y., 2003. Microbial ecology of dehalogenation. 
In: H¨aggblom, Max M., Bossert, Ingeborg D. (Eds.), Dehalogenation: Microbial 
Processes and Environmental Applications. Springer US, Boston, MA.  
Brewer, T.E., Aronson, E.L., Arogyaswamy, K., Billings, S.A., Botthoff, J.K., Campbell, A. 
N., Dove, N.C., Fairbanks, D., Gallery, R.E., Hart, S.C., Kaye, J., King, G., Logan, G., 
Lohse, K.A., Maltz, M.R., Mayorga, E., O’Neill, C., Owens, S.M., Packman, A., PettRidge, J., Plante, A.F., Richter, D.D., Silver, W.L., Yang, W.H., Fierer, N., 2019. 
Ecological and genomic attributes of novel bacterial taxa that thrive in subsurface 
soil horizons. mBio 10. https://doi.org/10.1128/mbio.01318-19, 10.1128/ 
mbio.01318-19.  
Buck, R.C., Franklin, J., Berger, U., Conder, J.M., Cousins, I.T., De Voogt, P., Jensen, A. 
A., Kannan, K., Mabury, S.A., Van Leeuwen, S.P., 2011. Perfluoroalkyl and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances in the environment: terminology, classification, and 
origins. Integr. Environ. Assess. Manag. 7, 513–541. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
ieam.258. 
Burrichter, A., Denger, K., Franchini, P., Huhn, T., Müller, N., Spiteller, D., Schleheck, D., 
2018. Anaerobic degradation of the plant sugar sulfoquinovose concomitant with 
H2S production: Escherichia coli K-12 and Desulfovibrio sp. strain DF1 as co-culture 
model. Front. Microbiol. 9, 2792. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2018.02792. 
Caporaso, J.G., Lauber, C.L., Walters, W.A., Berg-Lyons, D., Huntley, J., Fierer, N., 
Owens, S.M., Betley, J., Fraser, L., Bauer, M., Gormley, N., Gilbert, J.A., Smith, G., 
Knight, R., 2012. Ultra-high-throughput microbial community analysis on the 
Illumina HiSeq and MiSeq platforms. ISME J. 6 (8), 1621–1624. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/ismej.2012.8. 
Chen, G., Kara Murdoch, F., Xie, Y., Murdoch, R.W., Cui, Y., Yang, Y., Yan, J., Key, T.A., 
Loffler, F.E., 2022. Dehalogenation of chlorinated ethenes to ethene by a novel 
isolate, “Candidatus Dehalogenimonas etheniformans”. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 88 
(12), e0044322 https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.00443-22. 
Chow, S.J., Lorah, M.M., Wadhawan, A.R., Durant, N.D., Bouwer, E.J., 2020. Sequential 
biodegradation of 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene at oxic-anoxic groundwater interfaces in 
model laboratory columns. J. Contam. Hydrol. 231, 103639 https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jconhyd.2020.103639. 
Clark, K., Taggart, D.M., Baldwin, B.R., Ritalahti, K.M., Murdoch, R.W., Hatt, J.K., 
L¨offler, F.E., 2018. Normalized quantitative PCR measurements as predictors for 
ethene formation at sites impacted with chlorinated ethenes. Environ. Sci. Technol. 
52 (22), 13410–13420. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b04373. 
Duhamel, M., Edwards, E.A., 2006. Microbial composition of chlorinated ethenedegrading cultures dominated by Dehalococcoides. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 58 (3), 
538–549. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6941.2006.00191.x. 
East, A., Anderson, R.H., Salice, C.J., 2021. Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in 
surface water near US Air Force bases: prioritizing individual chemicals and 
mixtures for toxicity testing and risk assessment. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 40, 
859–870. https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.4893. 
Ewald, E.-M., Wagner, A., Nijenhuis, I., Richnow, H.-H., Lechner, U., 2007. Microbial 
dehalogenation of trichlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins by a Dehalococcoides-containing 
mixed culture is coupled to carbon isotope fractionation. Environ. Sci. Technol. 41 
(22), 7744–7751. https://doi.org/10.1021/es070935g. 
Fitzgerald, N.J.M., Wargenau, A., Sorenson, C., Pedersen, J., Tufenkji, N., Novak, P.J., 
Simcik, M.F., 2018. Partitioning and accumulation of perfluoroalkyl substances in 
model lipid bilayers and bacteria. Environ. Sci. Technol. 52, 10433–10440. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b02912. 
Glüge, J., Scheringer, M., Cousins, I.T., DeWitt, J.C., Goldenman, G., Herzke, D., 
Lohmann, R., Ng, C.A., Trier, X., Wang, Z., 2020. An overview of the uses of per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). Environ Sci Process Impacts 22, 2345–2373. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/d0em00291g. 
Hamid, H., Li, L.Y., Grace, J.R., 2020. Formation of perfluorocarboxylic acids from 6:2 
fluorotelomer sulfonate (6:2 FTS) in landfill leachate: Role of microbial 
communities. Environ. Pollut. 259, 113835. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
envpol.2019.113835. 
Harding-Marjanovic, K.C., Houtz, E.F., Yi, S., Field, J.A., Sedlak, D.L., Alvarez-Cohen, L., 
2015. Aerobic biotransformation of fluorotelomer thioether amido sulfonate 
(Lodyne) in AFFF-amended microcosms. Environ. Sci. Technol. 49, 7666–7674. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b01219. 
Hendrickson, E.R., Payne, J.A., Young, R.M., Starr, M.G., Perry, M.P., Fahnestock, S., 
Ellis, D.E., Ebersole, R.C., 2002. Molecular analysis of Dehalococcoides 16S ribosomal 
DNA from chloroethene-contaminated sites throughout North America and Europe. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68 (2), 485–495. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.68.2.485495.2002. 
Hnatko, J.P., Liu, C., Elsey, J.L., Dong, S., Fortner, J.D., Pennell, K.D., Abriola, L.M., 
C´apiro, N.L., 2023. Microbial reductive dechlorination by a commercially available 
dechlorinating consortium is not inhibited by perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs) at fieldrelevant concentrations. Environ. Sci. Technol. 57, 8301–8312. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.est.2c04815. 
Huang, S., Jaff´e, P.R., 2018. Isolation and characterization of an ammonium-oxidizing 
iron reducer: acidimicrobiaceae sp. A6. PloS One 13 (4), e0194007. https://doi.org/ 
10.1371/journal.pone.0194007. 
Huang, S., Jaff´e, P.R., 2019. Defluorination of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and 
perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) by Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 53, 11410–11419. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.9b04047. 
Huang, S., Chen, C., Peng, X., Jaff´e, P.R., 2016. Environmental factors affecting the 
presence of Acidimicrobiaceae and ammonium removal under iron-reducing 
conditions in soil environments. Soil Biol. Biochem. 98, 148–158. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.soilbio.2016.04.012. 
Huang, S., Sima, M., Long, Y., Messenger, C., Jaff´e, P.R., 2022. Anaerobic degradation of 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in biosolids by Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6. 
J. Hazard. Mater. 424, 127699 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.127699. 
Jaff´e, P.R., Huang, S., Sima, M., Ross, I., Liu, J., 2021. ER20–1219: biotransformation 
and potential mineralization of PFOS, PFHxS, and PFOA by Acidimicrobiaceae sp. In: 
A6 under iron Reducing Conditions. SERDP Final Report. https://serdp-estcp.org/in 
dex.php//content/download/53927/529646/file/ER20-1219%20Final%20Report. 
pdf. 
Johnson, G.R., Brusseau, M.L., Carroll, K.C., Tick, G.R., Duncan, C.M., 2022. Global 
distributions, source-type dependencies, and concentration ranges of per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances in groundwater. Sci. Total Environ. 841, 156602 https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.156602. 
Jones, E.J.P., Voytek, M.A., Lorah, M.M., Kirshtein, J.D., 2006. Characterization of a 
microbial consortium capable of rapid and simultaneous dechlorination of 1,1,2,2tetrachloroethane and chlorinated ethane and ethene intermediates. Biorem. J. 10, 
153–168. https://doi.org/10.1080/10889860601021399. 
M.M. Lorah et al.

## Page 11

Science of the Total Environment 932 (2024) 172996
11
Key, T.A., Bowman, K.S., Lee, I., Chun, J., Albuquerque, L., da Costa, M.S., Rainey, F.A., 
Moe, W.M., 2017. Dehalogenimonas formicexedens sp. nov., a chlorinated alkanerespiring bacterium isolated from contaminated groundwater. Int. J. Syst. Evol. 
Microbiol. 67 (5), 1366–1373. https://doi.org/10.1099/ijsem.0.001819. 
Kozich, J.J., Westcott, S.L., Baxter, N.T., Highlander, S.K., Schloss, P.D., 2013. 
Development of a dual-index sequencing strategy and curation pipeline for analyzing 
amplicon sequence data on the MiSeq Illumina sequencing platform. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 79 (17), 5112–5120. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.01043-13. 
Kucharzyk, K.H., Darlington, R., Benotti, M., Deeb, R., Hawley, E., 2017. Novel treatment 
technologies for PFAS compounds: a critical review. J. Environ. Manage. 204, 
757–764. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.08.016. 
Kurt, Z., Spain, J.C., 2013. Biodegradation of chlorobenzene, 1,2-dichlorobenzene, and 
1,4-dichlorobenzene in the vadose zone. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47, 6846–6854. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/es3049465. 
Liu, J., Wei, Y., Lin, L., Teng, L., Yin, J., Lu, Q., Chen, J., Zheng, Y., Li, Y., Xu, R., 
Zhai, W., Liu, Y., Liu, Y., Cao, P., Ang, E.L., Zhao, H., Yuchi, Z., Zhang, Y., 2020. Two 
radical-dependent mechanisms for anaerobic degradation of the globally abundant 
organosulfur compound dihydroxypropanesulfonate. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117 
(27), 15599–15608. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2003434117. 
Lorah, M.M., Majcher, E.H., Jones, E.J.P., Voytek, M.A., 2008. Microbial consortia 
development and microcosm and column experiments for enhanced bioremediation 
of chlorinated volatile organic compounds, West Branch Canal Creek wetland area, 
Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland. US Geol. Surv. Sci. Investig. Rep. 2007–5165 
https://doi.org/10.3133/sir20075165, 79 p. SIR 2007-5165_508.pdf (usgs.gov).  
Lorah, M.M., Walker, C., Graves, D., 2015. Performance of an anaerobic, static bed, fixed 
film bioreactor for chlorinated solvent treatment. Biodegradation 26, 1–17. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s10532-015-9738-1. 
Lorah, M.M., Baesman, S.M., He, K., Blaney, L., Akob, D.M., Harris, C.R., Tokranov, A.K., 
Hopkins, Z.R., 2024. Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) and Volatile 
Organic Compounds Measured in Laboratory Microcosm Experiments with Soil from 
Fort Drum. U.S. Geological Survey Data Release, New York. https://doi.org/ 
10.5066/P9VJ6HY8.  
Love, M.I., Huber, W., Anders, S., 2014. Moderated estimation of fold change and 
dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 550. https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8. 
Majcher, E.H., Phelan, D.J., Lorah, M.L., McGinty, A.L., 2007. Characterization of 
preferential ground-water seepage from a chlorinated hydrocarbon-contaminated 
aquifer to West Branch Canal Creek, Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland. In: U.S. 
Geological Survey Scientific Investigations Report 2006–5233. https://doi.org/ 
10.3133/sir20065233. http://md.water.usgs.gov/publications. 
Manchester, M.J., Hug, L.A., Zarek, M., Zila, A., Edwards, E.A., 2012. Discovery of a 
trans-dichloroethene-respiring Dehalogenimonas species in the 1,1,2,2-tetrachloro­
ethane-dechlorinating WBC-2 consortium. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 78, 5280–5287. 
MarvinSketch, 2018. Marvin 18.24.0, 2018, ChemAxon. http://www.chemaxon.com. 
McMahon, P.B., Tokranov, A.K., Bexfield, L.M., Lindsey, B.D., Johnson, T.D., 
Lombard, M.A., Watson, E., 2022. Perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances in 
groundwater used as a source of drinking water in the eastern United States. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 56, 2279–2288. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c04795. 
McMurdie, P.J., Holmes, S., 2013. phyloseq: an R package for reproducible interactive 
analysis and graphics of microbiome census data. PloS One 8, e61217. https://doi. 
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0061217. 
Moe, W.M., Stebbing, R.E., Rao, J.U., Bowman, K.S., Nobre, M.F., da Costa, M.S., 
Rainey, F.A., 2012. Pelosinus defluvii sp. nov., isolated from chlorinated solventcontaminated groundwater, emended description of the genus Pelosinus and transfer 
of Sporotalea propionica to Pelosinus propionicus comb. nov. Int. J. Syst. Evol. 
Microbiol. 62 (6), 1369–1376. https://doi.org/10.1099/ijs.0.033753-0. 
Molenda, O., Quaile, A.T., Edwards, E.A., 2016. Dehalogenimonas sp. strain WBC-2 
genome and identification of its trans-dichloroethene reductive dehalogenase, TdrA. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 82, 40–50. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02017-15. 
Mumford, A.C., Maloney, K.O., Akob, D.M., Nettemann, S., Proctor, A., Ditty, J., 
Ulsamer, L., Lookenbill, J., Cozzarelli, I.M., 2020. Shale gas development has limited 
effects on stream biology and geochemistry in a gradient-based, multiparameter 
study in Pennsylvania. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 117 (7), 3670–3677. https://doi.org/ 
10.1073/pnas.1911458117. 
Munoz, G., Fechner, L.C., Geneste, E., Pardon, P., Budzinski, H., Labadie, P., 2018. 
Spatio-temporal dynamics of per and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) and 
transfer to periphytic biofilm in an urban river: case-study on the River Seine. 
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 25, 23574–23582. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-0168051-9. 
Newell, C.J., Adamson, D.T., Poonam, R.K., Blossom, N.N., Connor, J.A., Popovic, J., 
Stroo, H.F., 2021a. Monitored natural attenuation to manage PFAS impacts to 
groundwater: potential guidelines. Remediat. J. 31 (4), 7–17. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/rem.21697. 
Newell, C.J., Adamson, D.T., Poonam, R.K., Blossom, N.N., Connor, J.A., Popovic, J., 
Stroo, H.F., 2021b. Monitored natural attenuation to manage PFAS impacts to 
groundwater: scientific basis. Groundw. Monit. Remediat. 41 (4), 76–89. https://doi. 
org/10.1111/gwmr.12486. 
O’Carroll, Denis M., Jeffries, Thomas C., Lee, Matthew J., Le, Song Thao, Yeung, Anna, 
Wallace, Sarah, Battye, Nick, Patch, David J., Manefield, Michael J., Weber, Kela P., 
2020. Developing a roadmap to determine per- and polyfluoroalkyl substancesmicrobial population interactions. Sci. Total Environ. 712, 135994 https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.135994. 
Ochoa-Herrera, V., Sierra-Alvarez, R., Somogyi, A., Jacobsen, N.E., Wysocki, V.H., 
Field, J.A., 2008. Reductive defluorination of perfluorooctane sulfonate. Environ. 
Sci. Technol. 42 (9), 3260–3264. https://doi.org/10.1021/es702842q. 
Ochoa-Herrera, V., Field, J.A., Luna-Velasco, A., Sierra-Alvarez, R., 2016. Microbial 
toxicity and biodegradability of perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) and shorter chain 
perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs). Environ. Sci.: Processes 
Impacts 18, 1236–1246. https://doi.org/10.1039/c6em00366d. 
Oksanen, J., Blanchet, F.G., Kindt, R., Legendre, P., Minchin, P.R., O’Hara, R.B., 
Simpson, G.L., Solymos, P., Stevens, M.H.H., Szoecs, E., Wagner, H., 2018. vegan: 
community ecology package. R package version 2.5-1, vR package version 2.5-1. 
https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/vegan/. 
Oksanen, J., Blanchet, F.G., Friendly, M., Kindt, R., Legendre, P., McGlinn, D., 
Minchin, P.R., O’Hara, R.B., Simpson, G.L., Solymos, P., Stevens, M.H.H., Szoecs, E., 
Wagner, H., 2019. vegan: community ecology package (Vers. 2.5-5), v2.5-5. https:// 
CRAN.R-project.org/package=vegan. 
Parada, A.E., Needham, D.M., Fuhrman, J.A., 2016. Every base matters: assessing small 
subunit rRNA primers for marine microbiomes with mock communities, time series 
and global field samples. Environ. Microbiol. 18 (5), 1403–1414. https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/1462-2920.13023. 
Park, S., Lee, L.S., Medina, V.F., Zull, A., Waisner, S., 2016. Heat-activated persulfate 
oxidation of PFOA, 6:2 fluorotelomer sulfonate, and PFOS under conditions suitable 
for in-situ groundwater remediation. Chemosphere 145, 376–383. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2015.11.097. 
Park, S., de Perre, C., Lee, L.S., 2017. Alternate reductants with VB12 to transform C8 
and C6 perfluoroalkyl sulfonates: limitations and insights into isomer-specific 
transformation rates, products and pathways. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51, 
13869–13877. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b03744. 
Park, S., Zenobio, J.E., Lee, L.S., 2018. Perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) removal with 
Pd0/nFe0 nanoparticles: adsorption or aqueous Fe-complexation, not 
transformation? J. Hazard. Mater. 342, 20–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jhazmat.2017.08.001. 
Parsons, J.R., S´aez, M., Dolfing, J., de Voogt, P., 2008. Biodegradation of perfluorinated 
compounds. In: Whitacre, D.M. (Ed.), Reviews of Environmental Contamination and 
Toxicology, vol. 196. Springer US, New York, NY.  
Patch, D., O’Connor, N., Koch, I., Cresswell, T., Hughes, C., Davies, J.B., Scott, J., 
O’Carroll, D., Weber, K., 2022. Elucidating degradation mechanisms for a range of 
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) via controlled irradiation studies. Sci. 
Total Environ. 832, 154941 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.154941. 
Payne, R.B., Fagervold, S.K., May, H.D., Sowers, K.R., 2013. Remediation of 
polychlorinated biphenyl impacted sediment by concurrent bioaugmentation with 
anaerobic halorespiring and aerobic degrading bacteria. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47, 
3807–3815. https://doi.org/10.1021/es304372t. 
Quast, C., Pruesse, E., Yilmaz, P., Gerken, J., Schweer, T., Yarza, P., Peplies, J., 
Glockner, F.O., 2013. The SILVA ribosomal RNA gene database project: improved 
data processing and web-based tools. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, D590–D596. https:// 
doi.org/10.1093/nar/gks1219. 
R Core Team, 2015. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R 
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. https://www.R-project.org/.  
Ray, A.E., Connon, S.A., Neal, A.L., Fujita, Y., Cummings, D.E., Ingram, J.C., 
Magnuson, T.S., 2018. Metal transformation by a novel Pelosinus isolate from a 
subsurface environment. Front. Microbiol. 9, 1689. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fmicb.2018.01689. 
Rogers, R.D., Reh, C.M., Breysse, P., 2021. Advancing per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFAS) research: an overview of ATSDR and NCEH activities and 
recommendations. J. Expo. Sci. Environ. Epidemiol. 31 (6), 961–971. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/s41370-021-00316-6. 
Sanchez-Andrea, I., Florentino, A.P., Semerel, J., Strepis, N., Sousa, D.Z., Stams, A.J.M., 
2018. Co-culture of a novel fermentative bacterium, Lucifera butyrica gen. nov. sp. 
nov., with the sulfur reducer Desulfurella amilsii for enhanced sulfidogenesis. Front. 
Microbiol. 9, 3108. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2018.03108. 
Schaefer, C.E., Choyke, S., Ferguson, P.L., Andaya, C., Burant, A., Maizel, A., 
Strathmann, T.J., Higgins, C.P., 2018. Electrochemical transformations of 
perfluoroalkyl acid (PFAA) precursors and PFAAs in groundwater impacted with 
aqueous film forming foams. Environ. Sci. Technol. 52, 10689–10697. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acs.est.8b02726. 
Schloss, P.D., 2021. MiSeq SOP [Online]. Available: https://mothur.org/wiki/miseq_s 
op/. (Accessed 3 December 2021). 
Schloss, P.D., Westcott, S.L., Ryabin, T., Hall, J.R., Hartmann, M., Hollister, E.B., 
Lesniewski, R.A., Oakley, B.B., Parks, D.H., Robinson, C.J., Sahl, J.W., 2009. 
Introducing mothur: open-source, platform-independent, community-supported 
software for describing and comparing microbial communities. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 75 (23), 7537–7541. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.01541-09. 
Sharifan, H., Bagheri, M., Wang, D., Burken, J.G., Higgins, C.P., Liang, Y., Liu, J., 
Schaefer, C.E., Blotevogel, J., 2021. Fate and transport of per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFASs) in the vadose zone. Sci. Total Environ. 771, 145427 https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.145427. 
Shaw, D.M.J., Munoz, G., Bottos, E.M., Vo Duy, S., Sauv´e, S., Liu, J., Van Hamme, J.D., 
2019. Degradation and defluorination of 6:2 fluorotelomer sulfonamidoalkyl betaine 
and 6:2 fluorotelomer sulfonate by Gordonia sp. strain NB4-1Y under sulfur-limiting 
conditions. Sci. Total Environ. 647, 690–698. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2018.08.012. 
Sima, M.W., Huang, S., Jaff´e, P.R., 2023. Modeling the kinetics of perfluorooctanoic and 
perfluorooctane sulfonic acid biodegradation by Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 during 
the feammox process. J. Hazard. Mater. 448, 130903 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jhazmat.2023.130903. 
Sunderland, E.M., Hu, X.C., Dassuncao, C., Tokranov, A.K., Wagner, C.C., Allen, J.G., 
2019. A review of the pathways of human exposure to poly- and perfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFASs) and present understanding of health effects. J. Expo. Sci. 
Environ. Epidemiol. 29, 131–147. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41370-018-0094-1. 
M.M. Lorah et al.

## Page 12

Science of the Total Environment 932 (2024) 172996
12
Tang, Z., Song, X., Xu, M., Yao, J., Ali, M., Wang, Q., Zeng, J., Ding, X., Wang, C., 
Zhang, Z., Liu, X., 2022. Effects of co-occurrence of PFASs and chlorinated aliphatic 
hydrocarbons on microbial communities in groundwater: a field study. J. Hazard. 
Mater. 435, 128969 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2022.128969. 
Underwood, J.C., Akob, D.M., Lorah, M.M., Imbrigiotta, T.E., Harvey, R.W., 
Tiedeman, C.R., 2022. Microbial community response to a bioaugmentation test to 
degrade trichloroethylene in a fractured rock aquifer, Trenton, N.J. FEMS Microbiol. 
Ecol. 98 (7), fiac077 https://doi.org/10.1093/femsec/fiac077. 
USEPA, 2024. (April 10). PFAS national primary drinking water Regulation. Retrieved 
from FACT SHEET. epa.gov. (Accessed 26 April 2024). 
Walters, W., Hyde, E.R., Berg-Lyons, D., Ackermann, G., Humphrey, G., Parada, A., 
Gilbert, J.A., Jansson, J.K., Caporaso, J.G., Fuhrman, J.A., Apprill, A., Knight, R., 
2016. Improved bacterial 16S rRNA gene (V4 and V4-5) and fungal internal 
transcribed spacer marker gene primers for microbial community surveys. mSystems 
1 (1). https://doi.org/10.1128/mSystems.00009-15. 
Wang, Z., Cousins, I.T., Scheringer, M., Hungerbuehler, K., 2015. Hazard assessment of 
fluorinated alternatives to long-chain perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs) and their 
precursors: status quo, ongoing challenges and possible solutions. Environ. Int. 75, 
172–179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2014.11.013. 
Weber, A.K., Barber, L.B., LeBlanc, D.R., Sunderland, E.M., Vecitis, C.D., 2017. 
Geochemical and hydrologic factors controlling subsurface transport of poly- and 
perfluoroalkyl substances, Cape Cod, Massachusetts. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51, 
4269–4279. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.6b05573. 
Yan, J., S¸ims¸ir, B., Farmer, A.T., Bi, M., Yang, Y., Campagna, S.R., L¨offler, F.E., 2016. The 
corrinoid cofactor of reductive dehalogenases affects dechlorination rates and 
extents in organohalide-respiring Dehalococcoides mccartyi. ISME J. 10, 1092–1101. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2015.197. 
Yang, Y., Higgins, S.A., Yan, J., Simsir, B., Chourey, K., Iyer, R., Hettich, R.L., 
Baldwin, B., Ogles, D.M., Loffler, F.E., 2017. Grape pomace compost harbors 
organohalide-respiring Dehalogenimonas species with novel reductive dehalogenase 
genes. ISME J. 11 (12), 2767–2780. https://doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2017.127. 
Yang, Y., Sanford, R., Yan, J., Chen, G., Capiro, N.L., Li, X., Loffler, F.E., 2020. Roles of 
organohalide-respiring Dehalococcoidia in carbon cycling. mSystems 5 (3). https:// 
doi.org/10.1128/mSystems.00757-19. 
Yang, S.-H., Shi, Y., Strynar, M., Chu, K.-H., 2022. Desulfonation and defluorination of 6: 
2 fluorotelomer sulfonic acid (6:2 FTSA) by Rhodococcus jostii RHA1: carbon and 
sulfur sources, enzymes, and pathways. J. Hazard. Mater. 423, 127052 https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.127052. 
Yilmaz, P., Parfrey, L.W., Yarza, P., Gerken, J., Pruesse, E., Quast, C., Schweer, T., 
Peplies, J., Ludwig, W., Glockner, F.O., 2014. The SILVA and “all-species living tree 
project (LTP)” taxonomic frameworks. Nucleic Acid Res. 42, D643–D648. https:// 
doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkt1209. 
Yu, Y., Zhang, K., Li, Z., Ren, C., Chen, J., Lin, Y.-H., Liu, J., Men, Y., 2020. Microbial 
cleavage of C–F bonds in two C6 per- and polyfluorinated compounds via reductive 
defluorination. Environ. Sci. Technol. 54, 14393–14402. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acs.est.0c04483. 
Yu, Y., Che, S., Ren, C., Jin, B., Tian, Z., Liu, J., Men, Y., 2022. Microbial defluorination 
of unsaturated per- and polyfluorinated carboxylic acids under anaerobic and 
aerobic conditions: a structure specificity study. Environ. Sci. Technol. 56, 
4894–4904. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c05509. 
Zhang, K., Huang, J., Yu, G., Zhang, Q., Deng, S., Wang, B., 2013. Destruction of 
perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) by ball milling. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 47, 6471–6477. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c05509. 
Zhang, X., Lohmann, R., Dassuncao, C., Hu, X.C., Weber, A.K., Vecitis, C.D., 
Sunderland, E.M., 2016. Source attribution of poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances 
(PFASs) in surface waters from Rhode Island and the New York Metropolitan Area. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett. 3, 316–321. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
estlett.6b00255. 
Zhang, W., Pang, S., Lin, Z., Mishra, S., Bhatt, P., Chen, S., 2021. Biotransformation of 
perfluoroalkyl acid precursors from various environmental systems: advances and 
perspectives. Environ. Pollut. 272, 115908 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
envpol.2020.115908. 
M.M. Lorah et al.

