# 1-s2.0-S095816692400106X-main

**Source PDF**: 1-s2.0-S095816692400106X-main.pdf

---

## Page 1

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 
Bacterial degradation of perfluoroalkyl acids 
Chiara M Smorada, Matthew W Sima and Peter R Jaffé   
Advances in biological degradation of per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFAS) have shown that bioremediation is a 
promising method of PFAS mineralization; however, most of 
these studies focus on remediation of more reactive 
polyfluorinated compounds. This review focuses on the 
defluorination of the more recalcitrant perfluorinated alkyl acids 
(PFAAs) by bacteria. We highlight key studies that report PFAA 
degradation products, specific bacteria, and relevant genes. 
Among these studies, we discuss trends in anaerobic versus 
aerobic conditions with specific bacterial species or consortia. 
This holistic review seeks to elucidate the state of PFAA 
biodegradation research and discuss the need for future 
research for environmental application. 
Address 
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Princeton 
University, USA   
Corresponding author: Jaffé, Peter R (jaffe@princeton.edu)  
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2024, 88:103170 
This review comes from a themed issue on Environmental 
Biotechnology 
Edited by Mari Winkler and George Wells 
For complete overview of the section, please refer to the article 
collection, “Environmental Biotechnology (2024)”  
Available online 16 July 2024 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2024.103170 
0958–1669/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is 
an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http:// 
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).  
Introduction 
Growing concern over PFAS (per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances) ubiquity and toxicity has galvanized PFAS 
fate and transport and remediation research. Physical 
removal may concentrate PFAS without degrading them, 
and chemical treatment technologies may produce toxic 
byproducts [1,2]. While significant progress has been 
made with the chemical reduction of PFAS [3–6], bio­
logical reduction is still in its infancy. Bioremediation of 
PFAS, if feasible, would potentially be a more cost-ef­
fective and environmentally friendly alternative for the 
mineralization of difficult-to-degrade PFAS, such as 
perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs), either by itself or com­
bined with physical and/or chemical techniques [2,7,8]. 
PFAAs are a subcategory of PFAS that only contain C-C 
and C-F bonds in the carbon chain tail and enter the 
environment through direct production or degradation of 
precursors. The long-chain perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acid 
(PFCAs) and perfluorosulfonic acids (PFSAs) with a 
general alkyl chain formula of CnF2n+1, (n ≥ 6) have been 
a major target of global regulations [9]. In contrast, 
polyfluorinated compounds contain fluorine substitu­
tions along the carbon chain and are generally more re­
active because the C-H bonds act as a weak point for 
initiation of biotic and abiotic degradation. Since bio­
degradation of polyfluorinated compounds has been 
documented more extensively [7,8,10,11], this review 
focuses on the more recalcitrant PFAAs. 
Our review identifies the most significant discoveries in 
the biodegradation of PFAAs by highlighting prominent 
microbes, degradation pathways, and enzymes associated 
with the degradation of PFAAs. We will review and 
discuss lines of evidence for PFAA biodegradation, in­
cluding intermediate production, and compare aerobic 
versus anaerobic conditions to determine the current 
state of PFAA biodegradation by itself and in combina­
tion with physical and chemical conditions. 
Microorganisms and per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances 
The rarity of naturally fluorinated compounds, combined 
with the relatively late environmental presence of PFAS, 
and fluoride (F-) toxicity, leaves microbes with an evo­
lutionary disadvantage for PFAA degradation [12–15], 
which is challenging because the dense hydrophobic layer 
around the alkyl chain is not easily accessible to microbes  
[10]. Toxicity studies suggest that PFAAs can cause cell 
membrane disruption, morphological changes, increased 
extracellular polymeric substance secretion, and oxidative 
damage of DNA. Microbial community studies in the 
presence of PFAAs evince shifts towards proteobacteria 
abundance in the presence of carboxylic acid PFAAs, and 
sulfur-cycling bacteria in the presence of sulfur-con­
taining PFAAs [7,16]. As such, microbes for biological 
degradation of PFAAs are typically sourced and isolated 
from PFAS-contaminated sites such as wastewater treat­
ment plant biosolids, soils, and industrial sediments 
where positive selection for PFAA-degrading microbes 
occurs [15,17]. Biotransformation and removal of PFAAs 
by isolated strains and mixed microbial consortia have 
been reported. 
Perfluorinated alkyl acids 
Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), a PFCA, and per­
fluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS), a PFSA, were 
]]]] 
]]]]]] 
www.sciencedirect.com 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2024, 88:103170

## Page 2

categorized as industrial persistent organic pollutants by 
the Stockholm Convention and listed in Annex A 
(elimination) and Annex B (restriction), respectively. 
Despite their phaseout by manufactures and elimination 
efforts by regulators, PFOA and PFOS remain persistent 
in the environment [18]. 
Bacterial strains associated with 
biodegradation of perfluoroalkyl acids 
Perfluorocarboxylic acids 
Recent studies provide varying degrees of evidence of 
PFOA biodegradation with PFOA removal, detection of 
transformation products, detection of F-, and expression 
of relevant enzymes. Prominent examples and degrada­
tion efficiencies are included in Table 1A, Table 1C. In 
2016, Yi et al. reported that Pseudomonas parafulva strain 
YAB-1 removed 48.1% PFOA over 96 h with the addition 
of 1 g/L of glucose to the inorganic salt culture medium  
[19]. A follow-up study in 2018 conducted genome 
shuffling to obtain a modified YAB-1 mutant (strain 
F3–52) that exhibited enhanced PFOA degradation, up to 
58.6%, and displayed an improved tolerance to PFOA 
(1200 mg/L). These studies do not comment on specific 
mechanisms, intermediates, or F- production [20]. 
Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6 (A6) was shown to co-me­
tabolize PFOA during oxidation of ammonium under 
iron reduction (Feammox) in both pure and enrichment 
cultures. Over 100-day incubations, up to 60% removal 
of 100 mg/L or 0.1 mg/L PFOA was observed in an 
enrichment culture of A6, concomitant with buildup of 
shorter PFCAs, including perfluoroheptanoic acid 
(PFHpA), 
perfluorohexanoic 
acid 
(PFHxA), 
per­
fluoropentanoic acid (PFPeA), and perfluorobutanoic 
acid (PFBA), and an overall a good fluorine balance. 
PFOA removal was not observed in the abiotic controls  
[32]. Additional work by this group showed the forma­
tion of H-PFOA, indicating that reductive defluorination 
may be initiated at the alpha-carbon [33]. Notably, in­
creased reactivity of the -CF2- group at the alpha carbon 
has also been observed in advanced reduction processes 
with hydrated electrons [3]. A6’s co-metabolism of 
PFOA was further exemplified in PFOA-contaminated 
biosolids augmented with an A6 enrichment culture and 
ferrihydrite as an iron source. Over 150 days, removal of 
PFOA in excess of 50% (total, dissolved, and solid as­
sociated) and production of shorter carbon chain PFAAs 
and F- were observed for incubations amended with A6 
and ferrihydrite, but not for the control groups [24]. 
Biodegradation of PFOA with buildup of F- and shorter 
PFAAs was also observed when A6 was grown in mi­
crobial electrolysis cells, where the Fe(III) is substituted 
for an anode as the electron acceptor [23]. Subsequent 
research used polyacrylic acid (PAA)-coated ferrihydrite 
to enhance PFOA degradation, as evinced by an increase 
in PFOA removal, F- production, and buildup of shortchain intermediates, concomitant with an increased 
ammonium removal. Similar to the case discussed above, 
this study too reported a good fluorine balance [28]. 
Within a lab-scale constructed wetland system, PFOA 
biotransformation was supported by a buildup of shortchain PFCAs, hydrogen-substituted perfluoroalkanes, 
and 
other 
partially 
fluorinated 
carboxylic 
acids. 
Dechloromonas and Pseudomonas were identified as pos­
sible PFAA-degrading species, and dehalogenase genes 
were upregulated in the constructed wetlands over 
time [27]. 
Perfluorosulfonic acids 
Elevated concentrations of sulfonated substances, which 
include PFOS and its shorter-chained derivatives, have 
been found in soil, surface- and groundwater, drinking 
water, and biosolids in most countries. Ochoa-Herrera 
et al. studied the microbial toxicity and biodegradability 
of PFOS and concluded that PFOS was not reductively 
dehalogenated by the microbial consortia used in their 
study [34]. This conclusion was put to question when 
Kwon et al. reported 67% removal of 1400–1800 µg/L 
PFOS by Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain HJ4 within 48 h. 
The strain was isolated from a mix of soil and activated 
sludge. Decrease in PFOS concentration was the pri­
mary evidence provided. Although no F- was detected 
and abiotic controls were not mentioned, the inter­
mediates perfluorobutanesulfonic acid (PFBS) and per­
fluorohexanesulfonic acid (PFHxS) were detected [35]. 
Other strains have been reported to degrade PFOS and 
are included in Table 1B, Table 1C. 
Pseudomonas plecoglossicida strain 2.4, isolated in 2017 by 
Chetverikov et al., was reported to use PFOS as a carbon 
source. These authors report biotransformation of PFOS to 
perfluoroheptane accompanied by a release of F- ions up to 
150 mg/L. Total PFOS removal was 75% in 6 days; PFOS 
decrease was not observed in the medium control. 
Desulfonation was the proposed first step, supported by the 
presence of an ion with m/z = 363 amu after 3 days, iden­
tified as perfluoroheptane [50]. Most recently, Sharipov et al. 
isolated Ensifer adahaerens M1 from a fire extinguishing 
agent testing area. M1 biodefluorination of PFOS was ob­
served to transform 1000 mg/L of PFOS, evinced by the 
formation of PFHpS and 152 mg/L of F- [40]. 
Microbial consortia associated with 
biodegradation of perfluoroalkyl acids 
PFOA and PFOS removal have also been documented 
in systems with microbial consortia. Microbial consortia 
originating from two river sediments with long-term 
PFOS and PFOA pollution were used to decrease PFOA 
by 16% with chemoorganoheterotrophic bacteria and 
36% with a consortium of yeast and mold over 28 days. 
Their untargeted LC/MS analysis shows the production 
2
Environmental Biotechnology  
www.sciencedirect.com 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2024, 88:103170

## Page 3

Table 1A 
PFCA biodegradation studies.         
Compound 
Organisms/enzymes 
Removal efficiency 
Degradation products/comments 
Aerobic or 
anaerobic 
Experimental conditions 
Reference  
PFOA 
Pseudomonas YAB-1 (NR040859) 48.1% decrease over 96 h 
Not reported 
Aerobic 
1 g/L glucose 
Yi et al. 19 
PFOA 
Pseudomonas YAB1 mutant 
F3-52 
58.6% degradation 
Not reported 
Aerobic 
Initial concentration: 1200 mg/ 
L PFOA 
Yi et al. [20] 
PFOA 
Pseudomonas plecoglossicida 
strain DD4 
Complete removal over 96 h 
Fluoride (132 mg/L), 
perfluoroheptane acid 
Aerobic 
Initial concentration: 1000 mg/ 
L PFOA 
Chetverikov 
and 
Sharipov [21] 
PFOA 
Activated sludge bacteria: 
Stenotrophomonas, Bacillus, 
Pseudomonas, and 
Brevundimonas 
Removal from microbial tests 
showed 46.6  ±  5.7% removal, 
phytoremediation showed  
49.0  ±  7.2% removal, 
synergetic system showed  
69.3  ±  5% removal over 
700 min 
PFHpA and PFHxA were detected 
in the synergetic condition but not 
in the individual photocatalytic or 
biological conditions. 
Aerobic 
Combination of photocatalysis 
and aerobic biological 
remediation under low PFOA 
(500 ppb) conditions. PFAA 
removal was compared 
between pure sorption, 
biological remediation, 
photocatalysis, and synergistic 
systems. Synergetic systems 
had the highest removal rate. 
Ding et al. [22] 
PFOA 
Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6, 
microbial electrolysis cells 
77% decrease with A6 highly 
enriched culture; 48.1% 
decrease in A6 enrichment 
culture 
Fluoride, PFHpA, PFHxA, 
PFPeA, PFBA 
Anaerobic 
A6 as electron acceptor, NH4
+ 
as electron donor 
Ruiz Urigüen 
et al. [23] 
PFOA 
Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6, 
biosolids 
37-68% decrease of PFOA over 
150-day biosolid incubations 
(WAS, AS, and FC) 
Fluoride (0.31-0.37 mg/L for 
10 mg/L PFOA; 0.023-0.099 mg/L 
for 0.2 mg/L PFOA) and buildup of 
shorter-chain PFCAs (PFHxA, 
PFHpA) 
Anaerobic 
Augmentation with A6 and/or 
ferrihydrite, autoclaved controls 
included, waste-activated 
sludge, activated sludge, and 
filter cake 
Huang 
et al. [24] 
PFOA 
Haloacid dehalogenase enzyme 
(DeHa I) from Delftia acidovorans 
engineered for expression in 
E. Coli 
Not reported, fluoride produced 
after 4 h 
Fluoride (∼1.25 µM for E. Coli with 
DeHa I) 
Aerobic 
Initial concentration: 100 ppm; 
PFOA used as energy source 
for D. Acidovorans 
Harris et al. [25] 
PFOA 
Bacterial consortium from 
anaerobic digestion 
Biochemical degradation of 
20.4–38% of the initial PFOA 
Not reported 
Anaerobic 
Higher biodegradation 
observed with higher PFOA 
concentration, up to 3 mg/L 
PFOA used 
Xie et al. [26] 
PFOA 
Microbial consortia in constructed 
wetland, including Pseudomonas 
and Dechloromonas 
PFOA removal observed 
Short chain PFCAs, perfluoroalkyl 
alcohols/aldehyde, unsaturated/ 
saturated organic fluorine, fluoride 
not detected 
Aerobic 
Initial concentration: 1001000 µg/L, T = 25°C; proposed 
mechanism: decarboxylation, 
hydroxylation, hydrolysis, 
dehydrogenating, and 
dehalogenation 
Xiao et al. [27] 
PFOA 
Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6, with 
PAA-coated ferrihydrite 
Enhanced PFOA removal over 
40 days with PAA (6 K and 
450 K) coated ferrihydrite 
compared to control with bare 
ferrihydrite 
Fluoride, PFHpA, PFHxA, 
PFPeA, PFBA 
Anaerobic 
Initial concentration: 1 mg/L 
PFOA; fluoride production 
reported highest for 450 Kcoated ferrihydrite (∼0.005 mM 
at end of incubations) 
Park et al. [28] 
PFCAs (C7-C10) 
Pseudomonas mosselii with 
possible genes for haloalkane 
Aerobic 
PFCAs as sole source of 
carbon, proposed mechanisms: 
Chetverikov 
et al. [29]   
bacterial degradation of perfluoroalkyl acids Smorada, Sima and Jaffé
3 
www.sciencedirect.com 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2024, 88:103170

## Page 4

of monofluorinated fatty acids that were not present in 
the control. The study posits that fluorination of the 
microbial fatty acids stabilizes the fluorine [43]. 
In 2023, Tang et al. investigated the biodegradability of 
PFOA and trifluoroacetate (TFA) using aquifer solids 
from a fluorochemical plant under anaerobic conditions. 
They showed 13.52% biological removal of 5 mg/L 
PFOA accompanied by 0.119 mg/L of F- production, 
PFHxA, and PFHpA in 10-month incubations. For TFA, 
they observed 8.03% removal of 10 mg/L TFA with 
0.166 mg/L of F- production over the 10-month in­
cubation period. No F- production was detected in the 
sterilized control or the active blank with no PFAS 
added. For the PFOA incubations, TFA and penta­
fluoropropionic acid were detected in the biodegradation 
groups. They posit that decarboxylation, followed by 
hydrolytic elimination and H/F exchange, is responsible 
for the observed intermediates. The most prominent 
phyla present in the incubations with TFA and PFOA 
were Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes [31]. 
Another investigation of PFOA removal in anaerobic 
digestion by Xie et al. attributed 36.1–61.2% of PFOA 
removal to sludge adsorption and 10.4–28.2% to biolo­
gical degradation [26]. Among the mentioned studies 
using microbial consortia, the strongest lines of evidence 
come from reports of transformation products, fluorine 
balances, and PFAA removal. Thus far, results presented 
in the study by Tang et al. and Huang et al. provide the 
most thorough evidence of PFAA degradation by mi­
crobial consortia, namely PFAA concentration decrease 
coupled with F- production and degradation product 
formation [31,33]. 
PFAA degradation experiments with an anaerobic mi­
crobial consortia, WBC-2, in the presence of chlorinated 
volatile organic compounds (cVOCs) indicate that 46.4% 
PFOS removal was attained over 45-day incubations. 
Sulfate reducer abundance increased, and a buildup of 
PFHxS, PFFeS, and PFBA was observed. This study 
posits that PFOS degradation was initiated by desulfo­
nation followed by sequential reductive defluorination to 
produce short-chain PFSAs [49]. Fluoride production 
was not reported. 
Synergetic combined systems for the 
biodegradation of perfluoroalkyl acids 
Given the challenge of PFAA biodegradation, re­
searchers have also focused on combining physical and 
chemical technologies with biological systems to initiate 
defluorination to make the partially fluorinated com­
pounds more susceptible to degradation by micro­
organisms 
capable 
of 
degrading 
polyfluorinated 
compounds. Although not the focus of this review,  
Table 1A (continued)          
Compound 
Organisms/enzymes 
Removal efficiency 
Degradation products/comments 
Aerobic or 
anaerobic 
Experimental conditions 
Reference  
dehalogenase gene (dhaA), 
haloacetate dehalogenase H-1 
gene (dehH1), fluoride ion 
transporter (crcB) and alkane 
sulfonate monooxygenase 
gene (ssuE) 
Removal of PFDA, PFNA, 
PFOA, PFHpA, and PFOS over 
7 days 
Fluoride, PFHpA, PFHxA as major 
product for all compound, PFHpS, 
PFHxS 
decarboxylation, desulfonation, 
reductive defluorination at the 
alpha-carbon of PFOS followed 
by shortening of carbon chain 
PFMeUPA 
(unsaturated C6 
PFCA, E-perfluoro4-methylpent-2enoic acid) 
Acetobacterium species with 
functional fluoride efflux pump 
(crcB) and electron bifurcating 
caffeate reduction pathway 
(CarABCDE) 
Removal of PFMeUPA over 3 
weeks 
Intracellular defluorination at the 
α-carbon yielded defluorination 
intermediates 
Anaerobic 
Initial concentration: 100 µM 
PFMeUPA, bacteria grown on 
fructose 
Yu et al. [30] 
PFOA, TFA 
Bacterial consortium with 
anaerobic bacteria, 
proteobacteria and bacteroidetes 
13.52% removal of PFOA, 
8.03% removal of TFA 
Fluoride production, PFHxA, 
PFHpA, TFA, and 
pentafluoropropionic acid 
Anaerobic 
Initial concentration: 5 mg/L 
PFOA or 10 mg/L TFA; fluoride 
production not observed in 
sterilized control for blank; 10month incubations 
Tang et al. [31]   
4
Environmental Biotechnology  
www.sciencedirect.com 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2024, 88:103170

## Page 5

Table 1B 
PFSA biodegradation studies.         
Compound Organisms/enzymes 
Removal efficiency 
Degradation products/comments 
Aerobic or 
anaerobic 
Experimental conditions 
Reference  
PFOS 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain HJ4 
67% removal of 14001800 µg/L PFOS within 
48 h; PFBS and PFHxS 
detected 
No fluoride detected 
Aerobic 
T = 30-37°C, pH 7-9, abiotic 
controls not mentioned 
Kwon et al. [35] 
PFOS 
Pseudomonas plecoglossicida 2.4-D 
75% removal in 6 days 
Fluoride (up to 150 mg/L), 
perfluoroheptane 
Aerobic 
Initial concentration: 1 g/L PFOS,  
T = 26-30°C, pH 6.8-7.2, NaCl 
concentration within 5%, proposed 
mechanism: desulfonation, PFOS 
used as carbon source, no PFOS 
decrease in medium control 
Chetverikov 
et al. [36] 
PFOS 
Marine, Gammaproteobacteria and 
Roseobacter, Flavobacteria 
In situ PFOS decreased by 
31% over 6 days. 85% 
decrease in PFOS when 
PFOS and PFOA present. 
No PFOA removal was 
observed 
No defluorination was 
observed, sulfate reducer bacteria 
and enzymes were prominent and 
the formation of perfluorooctanol 
was postulated but not observed 
Aerobic 
Experiments performed using 
Antarctic water both with in situ 
concentrations and spiked 
concentrations of PFOA and PFOS 
in a 1:0.6 ratio, respectively, 
proposed mechanism: 
desulfonation supported by 
increase in sox genes, sulfate 
monooxygenase, DMSP-related 
genes, and sulfohydrolases. 
Cerro-Galvez 
et al. [37] 
PFHxS 
Pseudomonas species (PS27 & 
PFMF10) 
24% removal by PS27 and 
15% removal by PDMF10, 
5-day incubations 
Not reported 
Aerobic 
Proposed mechanism: 
bioaccumulation, PFHxS did not 
serve as carbon or energy source, 
maximum bioaccumulation 
occurred in the presence of an 
ethanol-octane mixture 
Presentato 
et al. [38] 
PFOS 
Ensifer Moralensis H16 (gram 
negative, aerobic rods) 
88% PFOS removal 
Fluoride (removal of 4 F- ions per 
PFOS molecule), PFHpS 
Aerobic 
Initial concentration: 1000 mg/L, 
PFOS used as sole carbon source, 
batch fermentation, T = 28°C, pH 
6.8-7.2, proposed mechanism: 
monooxygenase elimination of 
sulfonate group 
Chetverikov and 
Hkudaigulov [39] 
PFOS 
Ensifer adahaerens M1 
Complete removal 
Fluoride (152 mg/L), PFHpS 
Aerobic 
Initial concentration: 1000 mg/L 
PFOS, 140 h incubations, proposed 
mechanism: monooxygenase 
elimination of sulfonate 
Sharipov 
et al. [40] 
PFOS 
Anaerobic microbial consortia 
24% PFOS removal over 
10 days 
2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5,5-nonafluoropentanal 
Anaerobic 
Initial concentration: 1000 µg/L 
PFOS, T = 35°C, pH 6 m 
cometabolism was observed with 
simulated sewage as a cosubstrate 
de S. Furtado 
et al. [41] 
PFOS 
Bacterial consortium with Paracoccus, 
Hyphomicrobium, and 
Micromonosporacea from activated 
sludge enclosed in capsules 
70% PFOS reduction, 6week incubations 
PFBS, 3,3,3-trifluoropropionic acid 
Aerobic 
Microbial membrane capsule 
increased biological degradation, 
bacterial consortia from activated 
sludge, initial PFAS concentration: 
2 mg/L 
Sorn et al. [42]   
bacterial degradation of perfluoroalkyl acids Smorada, Sima and Jaffé
5 
www.sciencedirect.com 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2024, 88:103170

## Page 6

Table 1C 
Multiple PFAA biodegradation studies.         
Compound 
Organisms/enzymes 
Removal efficiency 
Degradation products/ 
comments 
Aerobic or 
anaerobic 
Experimental conditions 
Reference  
PFOA, PFOS Chemoorganoheterotrophic bacteria AND 
consortia of yeast and mold 
16% decrease for bacteria; 
36% removal with consortia 
of yeast and molds over 
28 days 
Monofluorinated fatty acid, 
fluoride not detected 
Aerobic 
Initial concentration: 1 µg/mL 
Beškoski 
et al. [43] 
PFOA, PFOS Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6 
60% removal over 100 days 
Fluoride, shorter PFCAs 
(PFBA, PFPeA, PFHxA, and 
PFHpA) 
Anaerobic 
Initial concentration: 100 mg/L 
PFOA, 100 mg/L PFOS, reductive 
defluorination, pH 4.5 
Huang and 
Jaffé [32] 
PFOA, PFOS Activated Sludge Reactor at Laboratory 
Scale 
21-42%, removal for PFOA; 
15-27% removal for PFOS 
over 24 h 
Not reported 
Aerobic 
Initial concentrations: 100-500 ng/ 
L PFAAs, biodegradation 
observed after adsorption of 
PFAAs 
Chiavola 
et al. [44] 
PFOA, PFOS Ensifer adhaerens strain M1 
Degradation of PFOS 
completed in 6 days, 
degradation of PFOA in 
4 days 
PFHpA and fluoride 
Aerobic 
Bacteria from fire-fighting foams 
contaminated soil, used PFOA 
and PFOS as sole carbon source 
and energy, decarboxylation and 
desulfonation, T = 26-28°C, 
pH6.0-8.0, NaCl conc up to 2% 
Chetverikov 
and 
Loginov [45] 
PFOA, PFOS Phaenerochaete chrysosporium (fungi) 
with possible genes for laccase, lignin 
peroxidation, and manganese peroxidase 
69.23% removal in 35 days 
Partially fluorinated aldehydes, 
alcohols, and aromatic rings 
Aerobic 
Proposed mechanism: 
decarboxylation and 
rearrangement of short-chain 
fluorinated free radicals 
Zhou et al. [46] 
PFOS, 
PFBS, TFA 
Bacterial consortia from anaerobic 
granular sludge and anaerobic digester 
sewage sludge 
Unsuccessful, incubation run 
for 3.4 years 
Not detected 
Aerobic and 
anaerobic 
tested 
PFAAs not reductively 
dehalogenated, initial PFAS 
concentration: 200 mg/L 
Ochoa-Herrera 
et al. [34] 
PFOA, PFOS Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Pseudomonas 
putida 
27.9% removal PFOS and 
47.3% removal PFOS (P. 
aeruginoa), 19.0% PFOA 
removal and 46.9% PFOS 
removal (P. putida) over 96hour incubation 
PFOA degradation products: 
PFHxA with P. aeruginosa; 
PFPeA, PFHxA, PFHpA with P. 
putida; PFHxA and PFHpA 
from both strains for PFOS 
degradation 
Aerobic 
Initial concentration 10, 1, or 
0.1 mg/L, proposed mechanisms: 
desulfonation for PFOS, removal 
of CF2 groups for PFOA 
Chiriac 
et al. [47] 
PFOA, PFOS Iron cycling microbial consortia in 
constructed wetland, primarily 
Proteobacteria 
Percent removal due to 
biodegradation not specified 
Not reported 
Anaerobic 
Microbes and enzymes related to 
electron transfer during iron 
cycling increased; carbohydrate 
metabolism and acetate 
decarboxylation were linked to 
PFOA and PFOS degradation. 
Kang et al. [48] 
PFOA, PFOS Microbial consortia in constructed 
wetland, primarily Proteobacteria, 
Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, 
Planctomycetes, Chloroflexi, and 
Actinobacteria 
Percent removal due to 
biodegradation not specified 
Not reported 
Aerobic and 
Anaerobic 
Conclude iron minerals (magnetite 
and siderite) promote electron 
transfer that enhances PFAS 
removal by microorganisms 
Ma et al. [21]   
6
Environmental Biotechnology  
www.sciencedirect.com 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2024, 88:103170

## Page 7

Table 1D provides examples of these synergetic com­
bined systems [51,52]. 
Enzymes/genes associated with 
biodegradation of perfluoroalkyl acids 
Specific microbial machinery is necessary for PFAA de­
gradation, including mechanisms for PFAS transfer 
across the cell membrane, PFAS degrading enzymes, 
and fluoride detoxification [15]. Some key enzymes have 
been linked to PFAA biodegradation. Studies with fungi 
and cyanobacterium have pointed to laccase, lignin 
peroxidation, and fluoroacetate dehalogenase enzymes  
[57,55,53,58], but removal by laccase has been debated; 
some studies suggest that adsorption in laccase mediator 
systems mimic substrate loss [59]. In terms of bacterial 
enzymes, examples are included in Table 1D. Harris 
et al. showed that Delftia acidovorans, an aerobic bac­
terium found in PFAS-contaminated soil, was able to 
grow with PFOA as the sole carbon source. They en­
gineered a haloacid dehalogenase enzyme from this or­
ganism for expression in Escherichia coli (E. Coli). When 
E. Coli contained the engineered dehalogenase plasmid 
and was grown in 100 ppm PFOA-spiked media, F- re­
lease was observed [25]. 
Genes encoding a reductive dehalogenase homolog 
(RdhA), a fluoroacetate dehalogenase homolog (FceA), 
two putative haloacid dehalogenases (dhl_1 and dhl_2), 
and two putative F- pumps (CrcB) were identified in the 
genome of Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6. Expression of 
the rdhA gene had a significant correlation to F- pro­
duction and PFAA removal over the incubation period, 
while expression of dhl_1 and dhl_2 was related to de­
chlorination and did not change in the presence of 
PFAAs. The CrcB enzyme is expected to play a crucial 
role in removing F- from inside the cell, thus mitigating 
the toxic building of F-. Gene knockout experiments 
further confirmed that the enzyme encoded by the rdhA 
gene plays a key role in the defluorination of PFAAs by 
A6, while the FceA gene may just be co-expressed and 
plays no direct role in the PFAA defluorination [60]. 
Chetverikov et al. investigated the biodegradation of C7C10 PFCAs by Pseudomonas mosselii. The Pseudomonas 
strain grew on mineral media with PFCAs as the sole 
carbon sources. Over the course of one week, the con­
centration of PFHpA, PFOA, perfluorononanoic acid 
(PFNA), and perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA) decreased, 
and PFHxA was observed as the predominant degrada­
tion product accompanied by F- production. This study 
also found reduction defluorination at the ɑ-carbon for 
PFOS, which they attributed to the haloacetate deha­
logenase H-1. The dehalogenation was followed by 
carbon-carbon bond elimination that resulted in buildup 
of PFHpS. This cycle continued to produce PFHxS 
after 4 days. Subsequently, they posit that an alkane 
Table 1C (continued)          
Compound 
Organisms/enzymes 
Removal efficiency 
Degradation products/ 
comments 
Aerobic or 
anaerobic 
Experimental conditions 
Reference  
PFOA, PFOS Dehalogenating culture WBC-2 and native 
microbes from AFFF-contaminated site 
46.4% PFOS removal over 
45 days 
PFHxS, PFPeS, and PFBS; 
fluoride not measured 
Anaerobic 
Initial concentrations: 100 µg/L 
PFOS, 50 Mg/L PFOA,  
T = 22-23°C, pH= 7, 5 mM lactate, 
incubations with chlorinated 
volatile organic compound cocontaminants, Desulfosporosinus 
(Firmicutes) and Sulfurospirillum 
(Campilobacterota) increased with 
PFOS decrease, suggesting 
desulfonation. 
Lorah et al. [49] 
TFA, trifluoroacetate.  
bacterial degradation of perfluoroalkyl acids Smorada, Sima and Jaffé
7 
www.sciencedirect.com 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2024, 88:103170

## Page 8

Table 1D 
Enzymes and synergetic systems studies.         
Compound 
Organisms/enzymes 
Removal efficiency 
Degradation products/comments 
Aerobic or 
anaerobic 
Experimental conditions 
Reference  
PFOA 
Enzyme catalyzed oxidative 
humification reactions (ECOHRs) with 
soybean mediator 
In water 24% removal in 36 
days; in soil slurry 40% 
removal in 150 days 
Detected partially fluorinated 
organic compounds 
Aerobic 
Proposed mechanism: free radical 
chain reactions identified as main 
mechanism 
Luo et al. [53] 
PFOS, PFOA 
Enzyme catalyzed oxidative 
humification reactions (ECOHRs) 
Up to 30% removal under 
different ECHOR enzyme and 
mediator dosage in the 
presence of Laccase and 4methoxy-phenol 
Not reported 
Anaerobic 
Initial concentration: 1-30 μM PFOA 
Huang 
et al. [54] 
PFOA 
Synechicystis sp. PCC 6803 
(cyanobacterium) with possible genes 
for laccase, fluoroacetate 
dehalogenase, sodium symporters, 
ABCs associated proteins, fatty acid 
CoA ligases, and aquaporins 
identified as potential PFOS gateway 
37% removal PFOA at 
0.36 mg/L/d; 88% removal 
PFOS at 0.15 mg/L/d 
No detected 
Aerobic 
Aerobic continuous batch reactor 
with 1 mg/L PFOA or PFOS supplied 
Marchetto 
et al. [55] 
PFOA, PFOS 
Synergetic diatom (Chaetoceros 
muelleri) and iron nanoparticle system 
Defluorinated up to 93% PFOA 
and 89% PFOS in 24 h 
intermediates were produced 
such as PFPA and PFPrA 
Aerobic 
Synergetic diatom (Chaetoceros 
muelleri) and iron nanoparticle 
system in which the ROS produced 
by the diatoms are used to stimulate 
the Fenton reaction and defluorinate 
PFAAs 
Albert 
et al. [51] 
PFOA 
and PFOS 
Prominent bacteria on the biofilm 
were Cupriavidus (7%−49%), 
Mesorhizobium (1%−9%), and 
Dokdonella (1%−8%) 
97% PFOA and PFOS removal 
in 50-70 h 
Defluorinated PFOS with 1-9 
Fluorines replaced with Hydrogen 
atoms after MCfR treatment and 
various intermediate carbon chain 
PFOS from C2 to C6 PFOS 
intermediates after MBfR 
treatment 
Aerobic 
Paired Pd-based bimetallic catalyst 
membrane biofilm reactors in series 
with the effluent of a H2-based 
membrane catalyst-film reactor 
(MCfR) acting as the influent of a O2based membrane biofilm reactor 
(MBfR). The reactor shows that MCfR 
resulted in defluorination while MBfR 
resulted in a shortening of the carbon 
chain 
Rittman 
et al. [52] 
PFOA 
Microbial consortia in dual 
biocatalyzed microbial 
electrosynthesis system, 
Methanosarcina and Petrimonas were 
enriched 
91% removal (1 ppm), 85% 
removal (5 ppm), and 76% 
removal (10 ppm) in 120 h 
Propionic acid, short-chain 
PFCAs, acetate were produced 
and then disappeared 
Anaerobic 
Initial concentration: 1, 5, and 
10 ppm, T = 35°C, proposed 
mechanisms: decarboxylation, H/F 
exchange, chain shortening, radical 
formation 
Tahir 
et al. [56]   
8
Environmental Biotechnology  
www.sciencedirect.com 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2024, 88:103170

## Page 9

sulfonate monooxygenase cleaved the C-S bond to re­
lease SO3
- to form PFHxA by day 7. They point to a 
haloalkane dehalogenase gene (dhaA) and haloacetate 
dehalogenase H-1 gene (dehH1) for defluorination, a Fion transporter gene (crcB) for F- export out of the cell, 
and alkane sulfonate monooxygenase gene (ssuE) for 
desulfonation. This study concludes that these genes 
may be important for PFAA defluorination in their 
system [29]. Another study with an Acetobacterium species 
exhibited reductive defluorination via an electron-bi­
furcating caffeate reduction pathway for an 
,
-un­
saturated perfluorocaboxylic acids. In this experiment 
the bacterium also utilized a fluoride efflux transporter 
(crcB) [30]. 
Discussion 
Various lines of evidence have been provided for PFAA 
biodegradation under both aerobic and anaerobic con­
ditions, ranging from a decrease in PFAA concentration 
to PFAA decrease accompanied by the detection of Fand other degradation products (e.g. shorter PFAAs), 
which gives more confidence that the decrease in con­
centration is due to biodegradation. For environmental 
samples, proper controls must be included to ensure that 
these products are not from the degradation of other 
PFAS that might be present in these samples. 
So far, isolated bacterial phyla showing the most promise 
of PFAA biodegradation include Pseudomonas, Ensifer, 
and Acidimicrobium, all of which show significant PFAS 
removal backed by the production of F- and PFAA in­
termediates [20,50,60,29]. Studies with anaerobes typi­
cally involve a consortium of anaerobic bacteria, except 
for Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6, although, for this strain 
too, a higher activity and overall PFAA degradation is 
observed when it is grown in enrichment cultures [32]. 
Among the degradation products identified, shorterchain PFCAs and PFSAs are commonly reported. The 
most prominent mechanisms of PFAA degradation are 
decarboxylation, 
desulfonation, 
and 
stepwise 
de­
fluorination along the alkyl chain. Although fluorine 
balances are challenging for PFOS degradation studies, 
in part due to possible analytical interferences, detection 
limits, and possible formation of complexes [33], 
the detection of F- production is a valuable indicator of 
defluorination. 
Enzymes identified as key players in the PFAA de­
gradation are typically of the dehalogenase category and 
include reductive dehalogenase (rdhA), haloalkane de­
halogenase (dhaA), and haloacetate dehalogenase H-1 
(dehH1) enzymes [25,33]. Finally, a key aspect of PFAS 
degradation, in general, is the removal of toxic by­
products, especially F-, from the cell [12,13,61]. Ex­
amples include F- exporters or stabilization via 
incorporation into cellular components [43]. Both Jaffé 
et al. and Chetverikov et al. have identified specific Fion transporter genes responsible for removing the toxic 
F- ions from the cells of the bacteria degrading PFAAs  
[43,60,29]. 
To date, researchers have established links between 
PFAA biodegradation, specific bacterial communities 
and/or organisms, and specific gene expression for both 
aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Although some ex­
periments have been conducted with natural sediments 
or sludges, the papers reviewed discuss laboratory ex­
periments. Little to no research has been reported on 
PFAA biodegradation in the natural environment or at 
contaminated sites. This review indicates that there is 
still a large knowledge gap in our understanding of 
PFAA biodegradation mechanisms, identification, and 
characterization of relevant enzymes, the applicability of 
laboratory findings to field conditions, and potential ap­
plications for bioremediation. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Chiara M Smorada: Investigation, Writing – original 
draft, Visualization. Matthew W Sima: Investigation, 
Assisting in writing. Peter R Jaffe: Conceptualization, 
Funding acquisition, Supervision, Writing – review & 
editing. 
Data Availability 
No data were used for the research described in the 
article. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing 
financial interests or personal relationships that could 
have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper. 
Acknowledgements 
Partial support for this effort has been provided via funding by Solvay (now 
Syensqo), SERDP project #ER20-1219, NSF Award #2055015, NIEHS 
Grant #R01ES032694, and an NSF Graduate Fellowship for Chiara 
Smorada. 
References and recommended reading 
Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review, have 
been highlighted as:  
•• of special interest  
•• of outstanding interest  
1.
Zhou T, Li X, Liu H, Dong S, Zhang Z, Wang Z, Li J, Nghiem LD, 
Khan SJ, Wang Q: Occurrence, fate, and remediation for perand polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in sewage sludge: a 
comprehensive review. J Hazard Mater 2024, 466:133637, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2024.133637 
2.
Shu X, Pulicharla R, Kumar P, Brar SK: Comparison between 
chemical and biological degradation processes for 
perfluorooctanoic acid. Soil Syst 2023, 7:91, https://doi.org/10. 
3390/soilsystems7040091 
bacterial degradation of perfluoroalkyl acids Smorada, Sima and Jaffé
9 
www.sciencedirect.com 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2024, 88:103170

## Page 10

3.
Biswas S, Wang X, Wong BM: Advanced experimental and 
computational approaches for advanced reduction of per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances. Curr Opin Chem Eng 2024, 
44:101017, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coche.2024.101017 
4.
Esfahani EB, Zeidabadi FA, Rajesh L, McBeath ST, Mohseni M: A 
mini-review on advanced reduction processes for per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances remediation: current status and 
future prospects. Curr Opin Chem Eng 2024, 44:101018, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.coche.2024.101018 
5.
Houtz E, Kempisty D, Lester Y: Poly- and perfluoroalkyl 
substances destruction via advanced reduction processes: 
assessing scientific and commercial progress and prospects. 
Curr Opin Chem Eng 2024, 44:101022, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
coche.2024.101022 
6.
Nadagouda MN: Editorial overview: per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances. Curr Opin Chem Eng 2024, 44:101001, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.coche.2024.101001 
7.
••
LaFond JA, Hatzinger PB, Guelfo JL, Millerick K, Jackson WA: 
Bacterial transformation of per- and poly-fluoroalkyl 
substances: a review for the field of bioremediation. Environ Sci 
Adv 2023, 2:1019-1041, https://doi.org/10.1039/D3VA00031A. 
This thorough review summarizes recent advances in bacterial trans­
formation of both per- and polyfluorinated alkyl substances with a 
bigger emphasis on PFAS precursors. 
8.
••
Shahsavari E, Rouch D, Khudur LS, Thomas D, Aburto-Medina A, 
Ball AS: Challenges and current status of the biological 
treatment of PFAS-contaminated soils. Front Bioeng Biotechnol 
2021, 8:602040, https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2020.602040. 
This review provides a good overview of biological treatment of PFAS, 
including fungi and bacteria, in soils compared to other PFAS removal 
technologies. 
9.
Zhang Z, Sarkar D, Biswas JK, Datta R: Biodegradation of perand polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS): a review. Bioresour 
Technol 2022, 344:126223, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech. 
2021.126223 
10.
••
Douna BK, Yousefi H: Removal of PFAS by biological methods. 
Asian Pac J Environ Cancer 2023, 6:53-68, https://doi.org/10. 
31557/apjec.2023.6.1.53-68. 
This review thoroughly summarizes biological methods of PFAS re­
mediation, which include phytoremediation, vermiremediation, biode­
gradation, and bioadsorption. 
11. Thapa BS, Pandit S, Mishra RK, Joshi S, Idris AM, Tusher TR: 
Emergence of per- and poly-fluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) and 
advances in the remediation strategies. Sci Total Environ 2024, 
916:170142, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.170142 
12.
••
Wackett LP: Why is the biodegradation of polyfluorinated 
compounds so rare? mSphere 2021, 6:e0072121, https://doi.org/ 
10.1128/msphere.00721-21. 
This paper explains the challenges of microbial degradation of PFAS 
and describes the physiological machinery necessarily for microbes to 
defluorinate compounds. 
13. Wackett LP: Nothing lasts forever: understanding microbial 
biodegradation of polyfluorinated compounds and 
perfluorinated alkyl substances. Microb Biotechnol 2022, 
15:773-792, https://doi.org/10.1111/1751-7915.13928 
14. Leung SCE, Shukla P, Chen D, Eftekhari E, An J, Zare F, Ghasemi 
N, Zhang D, Nguyen N, Li Q: Emerging technologies for PFOS/ 
PFOA degradation and removal: a review. Sci Total Environ 
2022, 827:153669, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.153669 
15. Wackett LP: Evolutionary obstacles and not C–F bond strength 
make PFAS persistent. Micro Biotechnol 2024, 17:e14463, 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1751-7915.14463 
16. Sun Y, Wang T, Peng X, Wang P, Lu Y: Bacterial community 
compositions in sediment polluted by perfluoroalkyl acids 
(PFAAs) using Illumina high-throughput sequencing. Environ Sci 
Pollut Res Int 2016, 23:10556-10565, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s11356-016-6055-0 
17. Berhanu A, Mutanda I, Taolin J, Qaria MA, Yang B, Zhu D: A review 
of microbial degradation of per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFAS): biotransformation routes and enzymes. Sci 
Total Environ 2023, 859:160010, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2022.160010 
18. Weiss J, de Boer J, Berger U, Muir D, Ruan T, Torre A, Smedes F, 
Vrana B, Clavien F, Fiedler H: PFAS analysis in water for the Global 
Monitoring Program of the Stockholm Convention: Set-up and 
guildelines for monitoring. Chemicals Branch United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP) Division of Technology, Industry 
and Economics; 2015. 〈https://www.unitar.org/sites/default/files/ 
media/file/9._guidance_document_on_pfas_in_water.pdf〉. 
19.
•
Yi LB, Chai LY, Xie Y, Peng QJ, Peng QZ: Isolation, identification, 
and degradation performance of a PFOA-degrading strain. 
Genet Mol Res 2016, 15:1-12, https://doi.org/10.4238/gmr. 
15028043. 
One of the earlier reports of PFOA removal by Pseudomonas strain. 
20.
•
Yi L, Peng Q, Liu D, Zhou L, Tang C, Zhou Y, Chai L: Enhanced 
degradation of perfluorooctanoic acid by a genome shufflingmodified Pseudomonas parafulva YAB-1. Environ Technol 2018, 
40:1-20, https://doi.org/10.1080/09593330.2018.1466918. 
Follow up study from Yi et al. (2016) with an example of an engineered 
bacteria for defluorination of PFOA in E. Coli. 
21. Ma H, Zhang L, Wang Y, Kong G, Yu X, Guo Z, Kang Y, Kuang S, 
Zhang J: Strengthening effect of different iron minerals for 
perfluorooctanoic acid and perfluorooctane sulphonic acid 
removal in constructed wetlands: mechanisms of electron 
transfer and microbial effect. Chem Eng J 2024, 486:150199, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2024.150199 
22. Chetverikov SP, Sharipov DA: Biodegradation of 
perfluorooctanoic acid by Pseudomonas plecoglossicida strain 
DD4. Baghdad Sci J 2022, 19:1502-1511, https://doi.org/10. 
21123/bsj.2022.6825 
23. Ruiz-Urigüen M, Shuai W, Huang S, Jaffé PR: Biodegradation of 
PFOA in microbial electrolysis cells by Acidimicrobiaceae sp. 
strain A6. Chemosphere 2022, 292:133506, https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.chemosphere.2021.133506 
24. Huang S, Sima M, Long Y, Messenger C, Jaffé PR: Anaerobic 
degradation of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in biosolids by 
Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6. J Hazard Mater 2022, 424:127699, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.127699 
25.
•
Harris JD, Coon CM, Doherty ME, et al.: Engineering and 
characterization of dehalogenase enzymes from Delftia 
acidovorans in bioremediation of perfluorinated compounds. 
Synth Syst Biotechnol 2022, 7:671-676, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
synbio.2022.02.005. 
Example of engineered enzyme for PFOA defluorination. 
26. Xie H, Chen Y, Wang Y, Kong Z, Cao W, Zhang Y: Insight into the 
impacts and removal pathways of perfluorooctanoic acid 
(PFOA) in anaerobic digestion. Water 2022, 14:2255, https://doi. 
org/10.3390/w14142255 
27. Xiao J, Huang J, Wang Y, Qian X: The fate and behavior of 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in constructed wetlands: 
insights into potential removal and transformation pathway. Sci 
Total Environ 2023, 861:160309, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2022.160309 
28.
•
Park J, Huang S, Koel BE, Jaffé PR: Enhanced Feammox activity 
and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) degradation by 
Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6 using PAA-coated ferrihydrite as 
an electron acceptor. J Hazard Mater 2023, 459:132039, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2023.132039. 
Follow-up to Huang and Jaffé reporting enhanced Feammox activity and 
reports good fluorine balance. 
29.
••
Chetverikov S, Hkudaygulov G, Sharipov D, Starikov S, 
Chetverikova D: Biodegradation potential of C7-C10 
perfluorocarboxylic acids and data from the genome of a new 
strain of Pseudomonas mosselii 5(3). Toxics 2023, 11:1001, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/toxics11121001. 
10
Environmental Biotechnology  
www.sciencedirect.com 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2024, 88:103170

## Page 11

Authors report several genes that may contribute to PFCA biode­
gradation. 
30. Yu Y, Xu F, Zhao W, et al: Electron-bifurcation and fluoride efflux 
systems in Acetobacterium spp. drive defluorination of 
perfluorinated unsaturated carboxylic acids. bioRxiv. Published 
online December 13, 2023:2023.12.13.568471. doi:〈10.1101/2023. 
12.13.568471〉. 
31.
••
Tang Z, Vogel TM, Wang Q, Wei C, Ali M, Song X: Microbial 
defluorination of TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA by a native 
microbial consortium under anoxic conditions. J Hazard 
Mater 2024, 465:133217, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat. 
2023.133217. 
This study provides evidence of PFOA degradation, product formation, 
microbial community shifts, and fluoride production for trifluoroacetate 
and PFOA. 
32.
••
Huang S, Jaffé PR: Defluorination of perfluorooctanoic acid 
(PFOA) and perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) by 
Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6. Environ Sci Technol 2019, 
53:11410-11419, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.9b04047. 
Strong evidence for PFOA and PFOS defluorination with a good fluorine 
balance. 
33.
••
Jaffé PR, Huang S, Sima M, Ross I, Liu J: Biotransformation and 
potential mineralization of PFOS, PFHxS, and PFOA by 
Acidimicrobiaceae sp. A6 under iron reducing conditions. SERDP 
Project ER20–1219; 2021. 〈https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/ 
AD1159152.pdf〉. 
Presents results of PFOA defluorination at the alpha-carbon. 
34. Ochoa-Herrera V, Field JA, Luna-Velasco A, Sierra-Alvarez R: 
Microbial toxicity and biodegradability of perfluorooctane 
sulfonate (PFOS) and shorter chain perfluoroalkyl and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs). Environ Sci Process Impacts 
2016, 18:1236-1246, https://doi.org/10.1039/C6EM00366D 
35. Kwon BG, Lim HJ, Na SH, Choi BI, Shin DS, Chung SY: 
Biodegradation of perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) as an 
emerging contaminant. Chemosphere 2014, 109:221-225, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.01.072 
38.
••
Chetverikov SP, Sharipov DA, Korshunova TYu, Loginov ON: 
Degradation of perfluorooctanyl sulfonate by strain 
Pseudomonas plecoglossicida 2.4-D. Appl Biochem 
Microbiol 2017, 53:533-538, https://doi.org/10.1134/ 
S0003683817050027. 
Significant fluoride production reported, and example of bacteria using 
PFOS as a carbon source. 
37. Cerro-Gálvez E, Roscales JL, Jiménez B, Sala MM, Dachs J, VilaCosta M: Microbial responses to perfluoroalkyl substances and 
perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) desulfurization in the 
Antarctic marine environment. Water Res 2020, 171:115434, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2019.115434 
38. Presentato A, Lampis S, Vantini A, Manea F, Daprà F, Zuccoli S, 
Vallini G: On the ability of perfluorohexane sulfonate (PFHxS) 
bioaccumulation by two Pseudomonas sp. strains isolated 
from PFAS-contaminated environmental matrices. 
Microorganisms 2020, 8:92, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
microorganisms8010092 
39. Chetverikov S, Hkudaigulov G: New Ensifer moralensis H16 
strain for perfluorooctane sulphonate destruction. Fluoride 
2021, 54:309-320. 
40. Sharipov D, Starikov S, Chetverikov S: Biodefluorination of 
perfluorooctanesulphonate by Ensifer adhaerens M1. HAYATI J 
Biosci 2023, 30:313-320, https://doi.org/10.4308/hjb.30.2.313-320 
41. de S. Furtado RX, Sabatini CA, Sakamoto IK, Zaiat M, Azevedo EB: 
Biodegradation mechanism of perfluorooctane sulfonic acid 
(PFOS) in domestic sewage: specific methanogenic activity, 
molecular biology, and ecotoxicological aspects. J Water 
Process Eng 2023, 51:103453, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2022. 
103453 
42.
•
Sorn S, Hara-Yamamura H, Vet S, Xiao M, Hoek EMV, Honda R: 
Biological treatment of perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) 
using microbial capsules of a polysulfone membrane. 
Chemosphere 2023, 329:138585, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chemosphere.2023.138585. 
Example of enhanced biodegradation with microbial capsules. 
43.
•
Beškoski VP, Yamamoto A, Nakano T, et al.: Defluorination of 
perfluoroalkyl acids is followed by production of 
monofluorinated fatty acids. Sci Total Environ 2018, 
636:355-359, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.04.243. 
Indicates that fluoride may be incorporated in fatty acids. 
44. Chiavola A, Di Marcantonio C, Boni MR, Biagioli S, Frugis A, 
Cecchini G: PFOA and PFOS removal processes in activated 
sludge reactor at laboratory scale. Frontiers in Water-EnergyNexus — Nature-Based Solutions, Advanced Technologies and 
Best Practices for Environmental Sustainability. 2020,, https://doi. 
org/10.1007/978-3-030-13068-8_94 〈https://link.springer.com/ 
chapter/〉. 
45. Chetverikov SP, Loginov ON: A new Ensifer adhaerens strain M1 
is capable of transformation of perfluorocarboxylic acids. 
Microbiology 2019, 88:115-117, https://doi.org/10.1134/ 
S0026261718060085 
46. Zhou L, Li W, Zhang J, Mao H: Removal of perfluorooctanoic 
acid (PFOA) in the liquid culture of Phanerochaete 
chrysosporium. Chemosphere 2023, 345:140427, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2023.140427 
47.
•
Chiriac FL, Stoica C, Iftode C, Pirvu F, Petre VA, Paun I, Pascu LF, 
Vasile GG, Nita-Lazar M: Bacterial biodegradation of 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorosulfonic acid 
(PFOS) using pure Pseudomonas strains. Sustainability 2023, 
15:14000, https://doi.org/10.3390/su151814000. 
This study reports PFOA and PFOS degradation with pure 
Pseudomonas strains. 
48. Kang Y, Guo Z, Ma H, Wu H, Zhang J: Enhanced removal of 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctane sulfonate 
(PFOS) in constructed wetlands: iron cycling and microbial 
mechanisms. ACS EST Water 2023, 3:287-297, https://doi.org/10. 
1021/acsestwater.2c00250 
49.
••
Lorah MM, He K, Blaney L, et al.: Anaerobic biodegradation of 
perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) and microbial community 
composition in soil amended with a dechlorinating culture and 
chlorinated solvents. Sci Total Environ 2024, 932:172996, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.172996. 
Experimental study reporting bioreduction of PFOS by an anaerobic 
microbial consortia with chlorinated volatile organic compounds as a 
co-contaminant. 
50. Albert K, Hsieh PY, Chen TH, Hou CH, Hsu HY: Diatom-assisted 
biomicroreactor targeting the complete removal of 
perfluorinated compounds. J Hazard Mater 2020, 384:121491, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2019.121491 
51. Rittman B, Lai YJ, Zhou C, Friese D: A synergistic platform for 
defluorination of perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs) through catalytic 
reduction followed by microbial oxidation. SERDP Fianl Report 
ER20-1286. February 2022. 
52. Luo Q, Liang S, Huang Q: Laccase induced degradation of 
perfluorooctanoic acid in soil slurry. J Hazard Mater 2018, 
359:241-247, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2018.07.048 
53. Huang Q: Remedition of perfluoroalkyl contaminated aquifers using 
and in-situ two-layer barrier: laboratory batch and column study. 
SERDP Final Report ER-2127. April, 2023. 
54. Marchetto F, Roverso M, Righetti D, Bogialli S, Filippini F, 
Bergantino E, Sforza E: Bioremediation of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) by Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803: 
a chassis for a synthetic biology approach. Life 2021, 11:1300, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/life11121300 
55. Tahir K, Ali AS, Kim J, et al.: Enhanced biodegradation of 
perfluorooctanoic acid in a dual biocatalyzed microbial 
electrosynthesis system. Chemosphere 2023, 328:138584, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2023.138584 
56. Zhou L, Li W, Zhang J, Mao H: Removal of perfluorooctanoic 
acid (PFOA) in the liquid culture of Phanerochaete 
chrysosporium. Chemosphere 2023, 345:140427, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2023.140427 
57. Khan MF, Hof C, Niemcová P, Murphy CD: Recent advances in 
fungal xenobiotic metabolism: enzymes and applications. 
World J Microbiol Biotechnol 2023, 39:296, https://doi.org/10. 
1007/s11274-023-03737-7 
bacterial degradation of perfluoroalkyl acids Smorada, Sima and Jaffé
11 
www.sciencedirect.com 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2024, 88:103170

## Page 12

58. Steffens SD, Antell EH, Cook EK, et al.: An artifact of 
perfluoroalkyl acid (PFAA) removal attributed to sorption 
processes in a laccase mediator system. Environ Sci Technol 
Lett 2023, 10:337-342, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.estlett.3c00173 
59.
••
Jaffe PR, Huang S, Park J, Ruiz-Urigüen M, Shuai W, Sima M: 
Defluorination of PFAS by Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6 and 
potential applications for remediation. Methods Enzymol 2024, 
696:287-320, https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.mie.2024.01.013. 
Summarizes findings of Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6 PFAA degradation, 
gene expression, and avenues for application. 
60. Ding R, Wu Y, Yang F, Xiao X, Li Y, Tian X, Zhao F: Degradation of 
low-concentration perfluoroctanoic acid via a microbial-based 
synergistic method: assessment of the feasibility and 
functional microorganisms. J Hazard Mater 2020, 416:125857, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.125857  
12
Environmental Biotechnology  
www.sciencedirect.com 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2024, 88:103170

