# 1-s2.0-S030438942403005X-main

**Source PDF**: 1-s2.0-S030438942403005X-main.pdf

---

## Page 1

Defluorination of various perfluoro alkyl acids and selected PFOA and PFOS 
monomers by Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 enrichment cultures
Shan Huang a, Giovanni Pilloni b,c, Trent A. Key d, Peter R. Jaff´e a,*
a Princeton University, United States
b ExxonMobil Technology and Engineering Company, United States
c ExxonMobil Environmental and Property Solutions Company, United States
d ExxonMobil Biomedical Sciences Inc., United States
H I G H L I G H T S
G R A P H I C A L  A B S T R A C T
• Shorter PFAAs produced during the 
degradation of PFOA/PFOS by A6 are 
also degradable.
• Of these shorter PFAAs, PFPeA is 
degraded by far the slowest.
• Linear and single branched PFOA/PFOS 
monomers are degradable by A6.
• Double branched PFOA/PFOS mono­
mers are either not degradable or 
degrade very slowly.
• The presence of PFAAs has a strong 
impact on the microbial community 
structure.
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6
PFAS biodegradation
PFOA
PFOS
Linear
Branched
Perfluoroalkyl acids
Microbial community
A B S T R A C T
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) have emerged as a diverse class of environmental pollutants, 
garnering increasing attention due to their various structural types and potential ecological impacts. The impact 
of select PFAS on environmental microorganisms and the potential for microbial degradation of certain PFAS are 
timely research topics. In this study, we conducted a series of batch incubation to investigate the effects of C4-C10 
perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids (PFCAs) and perfluorosulfonic acids (PFSAs), as well as linear and branched 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) monomers, on the Feammox reaction 
and Acidimicrobium sp. A6 (A6), a microbe known to degrade PFOA and PFOS. We explored the defluorination 
ability of A6 cultures with these PFAS, evaluating their response to varying chemical structures. While A6 cul­
tures demonstrated the ability to degrade a wide range of PFAAs (11.5–56.9 % reduction over 120 days), 
challenges were noted with specific compounds like PFPeA and double-branched PFCAs and PFSAs, which also 
showed reduced ammonium removal. Additionally, exposure to the selected PFAS resulted in notable shifts in the 
microbial community within the A6 enrichment cultures, indicating a selective pressure that benefits certain 
strains (e.g., increased percentages of Acidimicrobium, Paraburkholderia, and Desulfosporosinus in several PFCA, 
PFSA and PFOA/PFOS monomers enriched cultures). These insights contribute to our understanding of 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: jaffe@princeton.edu (P.R. Jaff´e). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Hazardous Materials
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jhazmat
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2024.136426
Received 29 July 2024; Received in revised form 8 October 2024; Accepted 5 November 2024  
Journal of Hazardous Materials 480 (2024) 136426 
Available online 6 November 2024 
0304-3894/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync/4.0/ ).

## Page 2

microbial-PFAS interactions and are instrumental in developing bioremediation strategies for PFAS-impacted 
environments.
1. Introduction
Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) are a group of man-made 
chemicals that have been used in various industrial and consumer 
products for their oil and water-repellent properties [1,2]. These com­
pounds, often referred to as "forever chemicals," are characterized by 
their persistence in the environment and resistance to natural biodeg­
radation processes. Such persistence poses significant challenges and has 
led to potential environmental concern. Certain PFAS have been 
detected in various environmental matrices, including water, soil, and 
air [3–5]. According to recent research, once released into the envi­
ronment, select PFAS can travel long distances due to atmospheric 
deposition and transport through water, often reaching remote and 
pristine areas [6]. The environmental concern is compounded by the 
bioaccumulative nature of certain PFAS compounds. These substances 
have been found in various species, including fish, birds, and mammals, 
potentially posing a risk to ecological systems and human health [7].
The potential impact of PFAS on the environment is increasingly 
becoming a focal point of research, including their effect on microbial 
communities. Microorganisms play a crucial role in ecosystem func­
tioning, and the introduction of PFAS may alter the structure and 
functionality of these microbial communities [8]. Studies have shown 
that exposure to certain PFAS can lead to reduced microbial diversity 
and abundance in various environments, including Antarctic coastal 
waters, soil, wetland sediment, and activated sludge from wastewater 
treatment plants [9–12]. At higher concentrations (e.g., >100 μg kg−1 
dw), PFAS may also inhibit the growth of a broader range of microbial 
taxa, thereby reducing diversity [13]. Conversely, other studies also 
noted increases in microbial diversity in the presence of PFAS. Specif­
ically, under the long-time exposure to perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) 
and perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS), there was an observed in­
crease in the alpha-diversity of microbial communities in soils [14]. A 
consensus emerging from all these studies is that exposure to certain 
PFAS can potentially create niches that select for a variety of tolerant 
species. While certain studies may show that the overall microbial 
abundance may decrease under the stress of PFAS, there is a notable 
increase in the abundance of certain bacteria that exhibit a more positive 
response to certain PFAS. Bacteria such as Proteobacteria, Burkholder­
iales, and Rhodocyclales in soils, along with Acinetobacter, Pseudomonas, 
and Arthrobacter in groundwater, were observed to be more abundant in 
samples exposed to PFAS [9,14]. The response of microbial communities 
to PFAS also varied depending on the type of PFAS compound and its 
concentration.
Microbial degradation of non-polymeric PFAS could constitute a 
crucial aspect of how microorganisms respond to exposure to these 
compounds. This process, which entails the defluorination and eventual 
breakdown of PFAS by microbial activity, results from the cleavage of 
carbon-fluorine (C-F) bonds to release fluoride ions (F-) and the degra­
dation of parent PFAS molecules. The microbial-mediated cleavage of CF bonds in PFAS compounds has long been deemed challenging [15]. 
Recent studies have increasingly provided evidence of microbial 
degradation and defluorination, with both mixed and pure microbial 
cultures showing the ability to degrade per- and polyfluoroalkyl sub­
stances under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Most reported 
biodegradation or biotransformation studies have utilized mixed cul­
tures degrading shorter-chain (C4-C5) fluorinated carboxylic acids 
derived from activated sludge [16], PFOA from digestion sludge [17], 
6:2, 4:2 fluorotelomer alcohols (FTOH), and 2-(trifluoromethyl)acrylic 
acid from landfill soil [18], and 6:2 fluorotelomer sulfonate (6:2 FTSA) 
in aerobic and anaerobic sediments [19]. Pseudomonas sp. appear to be a 
promising candidate for the biodegradation of PFOA and PFOS, as well 
as C7-C10 PFCAs [20–24]. Research conducted by Shaw et al. also 
revealed that the aerobic Gordonia sp. strain NB4–1Y can effectively 
degrade 6:2 FTAB and 6:2 FTSA, achieving degradation efficiencies of 
85% and 88%, respectively, within a week [25].
However, PFAS might end up in anoxic environments, like relatively 
saturated soils, sediments, groundwater, where breakdown processes 
would have to rely on anaerobic microorganisms. A study by Huang and 
Jaff´e (2019) demonstrated via a rigorous mass balance that PFOA and 
PFOS were degraded anaerobically by Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 (A6) 
[26]. A6 is an autotroph that uses either NH4
+ or H2 as the electron donor 
and ferric iron phases as the electron acceptor [27] in a process that has 
been termed Feammox. Degradation of perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs) by 
A6, with the production of smaller (i.e., shorter carbon-chain) PFAAs 
and F-, has now, in addition to the initial study by Huang and Jaff´e 
(2019), been observed in multiple incubations and different settings, 
including in biosolids [28], in microbial electrolysis cells [29], and in 
the presence of ferrihydrite treated with polyacrylic acids [30], which 
enhanced the overall Feammox and PFOA degradation activity. Bio­
degradation/biotransformation of various polyfluorinated compounds 
(6:2 FTS, 8:2 FTS, 6:2 FTOH, 8:2 FTOH, 8:2 diPAP) by the A6 enrich­
ment culture has also been observed [31], although the role of A6 in 
these processes has not been investigated further. Kinetics of defluori­
nation of PFOA and PFOS by A6 showed that the defluorination rate is 
directly proportional to the rate of NH4
+ oxidation and first order with 
respect to the PFOA/PFOS concentration [32]. In addition to the pro­
duction of smaller PFAAs, the production of H-PFOA during the degra­
dation of PFOA was also observed [33]. Based on the incubation results 
with the A6 enrichment cultures, it is hypothesized that after A6 
removes a fluorine atom from PFOA, other microbes, likely hetero­
trophs, can then further degrade the partially defluorinated compounds. 
This underscores the importance of further investigating how different 
organisms within the microbial community (including the A6 enrich­
ment culture) interact and contribute to the PFAS degradation process.
There are many ongoing efforts to understand the underlying 
mechanisms of all the different non-polymeric PFAS degradation pro­
cesses. While various hypotheses for biodegradation mechanisms 
remain somewhat unclear (with some showing fluoride ion production, 
others intermediate products, and some none), experimental results 
have indicated the potential for biodegradation of several PFAS. This is 
encouraging for further research and development of novel biodegra­
dation technologies.
Our various studies to-date have demonstrated that A6 is capable of 
degrading PFAAs such as PFOA, PFOS, and PFHxS [26,28–30,33]. The 
objectives of this work were to: 
(i) Determine whether the shorter carbon-chain PFAAs that are 
produced during the degradation of PFOA/PFOS are also 
degradable by the A6 enrichment culture.
(ii) Determine how the structure of the PFOA/PFOS monomers (i.e., 
linear, single branched, double branched) affects the degradation 
of these compounds by A6.
(iii) Examine the impact of the presence of PFAAs on the abundance 
and structure of the microbial community within the A6 enrich­
ment culture, and identify organisms in that enrichment culture 
that have been associated with the degradation of polyfluorinated 
alkyl substances.
S. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Hazardous Materials 480 (2024) 136426 
2

## Page 3

2. Methods and materials
2.1. Chemicals
The degradation by the Acidimicrobium sp. A6 enrichment culture of 
11 different perfluoroalkyl compounds plus different PFOA and PFOS 
monomers (see Table S1 for detailed information) was investigated in 
this study. These compounds were purchased from Wellington, Inc., 
Sigma-Aldrich, and Manchester Organics, Ltd. Stock solutions of the 
various PFAAs investigated were prepared in DI water/HPLC grade 
methanol at concentrations of ~2 ppm for PFOA/PFOS monomers, and 
~10 ppm for the individual perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids (PFCAs), and 
perfluoroalkyl sulfonates (PFSAs). All the stock solutions were stored at 
4 ◦C.
2.2. Setup of the anaerobic incubation experiments
PFAA degradation by Acidimicrobium sp. A6 has been observed for 
both pure and enrichment cultures, but since Acidimicrobium sp. A6 is 
more active in enrichment cultures, indicating a synergistic interaction 
with other organisms, incubations described here were done with an 
Acidimicrobium sp. A6 enrichment culture. The enrichment culture was 
maintained under anaerobic conditions in an inorganic Fe(III)-NH4
+
enrichment medium [26,27], and acclimated to 10 ppm PFOA for 180 
days. To avoid carryover of PFOA, the culture was centrifuged and then 
the supernatant was replaced, which was repeated twice before the 
culture was added to the serum bottles containing the growth medium 
and the selected PFAAs at their specific concentrations.
In the study examining various PFOA/PFOS monomers, the Acid­
imicrobium sp. A6 enrichment culture, containing about 106 copies/mL 
of Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6 as determined using qPCR, was mixed 
with the inorganic Fe(III)-NH4
+ medium in a 1:9 vol ratio. This mixture 
was then incubated in a series of 15 mL and 60 mL vials, maintaining 
50% headspace. In the 15 mL vials, each PFOA/PFOS monomer was 
added to the culture to reach a final concentration of ~100 ppb. Simi­
larly, for incubations involving C4-C10 PFCAs and PFSAs in 60 mL vials, 
the respective compounds were introduced to achieve a final concen­
tration of approximately 10 ppm. For the incubations described herein, 
the initial concentration of Fe(III) and NH4
+ was around 365 mg/L and 
50 mg/L, respectively. Additionally, the background concentration of as 
F- was about 60 ppb.
Then all the vials were sealed with butyl rubber stoppers, and a N2/ 
CO2 (80:20) gas mixture in the headspace to achieve anoxic conditions 
and to provide additional CO2 for the growth of A6. Abiotic and heatinactivated biomass controls were set up in parallel for all these in­
cubations, and in the same manner, as described above. A biotic control, 
but without added PFAA was also run in parallel to determine if the 
presence of various PFAA had a negative effect on the Feammox activity 
by A6. Each treatment was repeated in triplicate, and the results were 
averaged. During the 120-day incubations, which were conducted at 
ambient temperature (25 oC), three vials were sacrificially sampled 
every 30 days and the chemical and microbial characteristics were 
analyzed.
2.3. Chemical analyses
A 1 mL slurry sample from both day 0 and day 120 was extracted 
using a 50:50 methanol solution. Extracts were then centrifuged for 2 
min at 4000 rpm, and the supernatant was then filtered through 0.22 a 
µm membrane filter. PFAA analyses were then performed on a liquid 
chromatograph coupled to a single quadrupole mass spectrometer 
(LCMS-2050 Shimadzu), in accordance with EPA Method 537.1 [34,35]. 
Filtered aliquots (1 µL) were injected into the LC/MS system, which is 
equipped with a Shimpak GIST C18 (delay column, 5 µm, 3.0 × 50 mm) 
and Shimpak Velox C18 column (I.D. 2.1 mm, length 50 mm, particle 
size 2.7 µm) from Shimadzu. This was done at a flow rate of 0.4 mL 
min−1 at 40 ◦C, enabling the separation of parent compounds and their 
tentatively identified metabolites among shorter-chain PFAAs. The 
gradient for the mobile phase in liquid chromatography was pro­
grammed as follows: Initially, the mobile phase consisted of 95% solvent 
A (5 mM ammonia acetate in water) and 5% solvent B (pure methanol), 
maintained for 0.5 min. The concentration of solvent B was then grad­
ually increased to 95% over 12 min, held steady for 2 min, subsequently 
reduced to 10% in 1 min, and finally maintained for an additional 4 min. 
The mass spectrometer operated in negative-ion electrospray mode. 
Quantitative analysis relied on certified standards for native compounds 
and isotope-labeled internal standards, obtained from Wellington Lab­
oratories, Inc., with a purity of 98% or higher. LC/MS identification of 
PFAS depended on matching retention times with certified standards 
(Table S2). Also, 2 mL subsamples collected on day 0, 30, 60, 90, were 
centrifuged filtered through a 0.22 µm membrane filter, then the 
quantitative analysis of PFAAs was performed using High-Performance 
Liquid Chromatography coupled to tandem Mass Spectrometry 
(HPLC-MS-MS: Agilent 1290–6430 A), by SGS-CSTC Standards Tech­
nical Services Co., Ltd (China) according to well-established methods 
[36,37], to assess the trend in PFAS concentration changes. 2 mL liquid 
samples were filtered (0.2 µm) and then NH4
+ were analyzed via Ion 
Chromatography (IC-3000, Dionex), with an CS-16 column (flow rate =
1.00 mL min-1, detection limit = 0.01 mg/l) [26]. F- was measured via IC 
using an AS-22 column (flow rate = 1.20 mL min-1, detection limit =
0.012 mg/l). Analyses were then repeated using an AS-18 column (flow 
rate = 1.00 mL min-1, detection limit = 0.01 mg/l). Dionex™ Retention 
Time Standards for all the anion analysis were used. As an additional 
confirmation, F- was also analyzed using a perfectION™ combination 
electrode (Mettler-Toledo, USA) [26]. For Fe analysis, slurry sample 
were extracted with 0.5 mM HCl for 24 h, then Fe(II) concentration was 
measured spectrophotometrically with ferrozine at 560 nm [38].
2.4. 16S rRNA Sequencing on Illumina Miseq platform and data 
processing
DNA was extracted from 1 mL sub-samples, following the procedure 
described in the manual of the Fast DNA spin kit (Bio 101, Qbiogene Inc. 
CA, USA). The concentration and purity of the isolated total DNA were 
checked using a Qubit@ 2.0 Fluorometer (Thermo Scientific). The V4 
region of the 16S rRNA gene of bacteria was amplified using primer-set 
515f-806r [39]. All PCR reactions were carried out with a Phusion® 
High-Fidelity PCR Master Mix (New England Biolabs), and the PCR 
products were quantified and purified before sequencing. Sequencing 
libraries were generated using TruSeq® DNA PCR-Free Sample Prepa­
ration Kit (Illumina, USA) following the manufacturer’s recommenda­
tions. The library quality was assessed on the Qubit@ 2.0 Fluorometer 
(Thermo Scientific) and Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 system. Finally, the 
library was sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq platform at Novogene Co. 
(Beijing, China) and 250 bp paired-end reads were generated.
Raw data were analyzed using QIIME2 version 2022.11 [40]. Briefly, 
forward and reverse paired-end reads were trimmed for quality and the 
Illumina adaptors were removed using Dada2 [41], as implemented in 
QIIME2. Subsequently, denoised data were clustered and classified 
against the Greengenes2 database [42] to assign the appropriate tax­
onomy for every Amplicon Sequence Variant (ASV). For certain ASVs of 
interest, manual classification using NCBI’s nucleotide Basic Local 
Alignment Search Tool (BLAST, 40) was performed. Diversity data were 
computed directly in QIIME2, while ASV counts at the genus level were 
used for subsequent analyses. Sequences are available from the NCBI 
Sequence Read Archive under BioProject PRJNA1140605.
2.5. Real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis
qPCR analyses were used to quantify total bacterial numbers, and 
Acidimicrobiaceae bacteria, with primers 1055 f(5′-ATGGCTGTCGT­
CAGCT-3′) −1392r(5′-ACGGGGCGGTGTGTAC-3′) and acm_v1F (5′- 
S. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Hazardous Materials 480 (2024) 136426 
3

## Page 4

GGCGGCGTGCTTAACACAT-3′) and acm_v1R (5′-GAGCCCGTCCCA­
GAGTGATA-3) [43–45], respectively. The qPCR analysis of each gene 
was done on a 96-well StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR System (Applied 
Biosystems, CA, USA), followed detailed qPCR protocol as well as 
quality control were as described previously [44,45]. The PCR amplifi­
cation efficiencies were 91–105%, and coefficient of determination (R2) 
for all assays were > 0.99.
2.6. Statistical methods
Significance for all tests was accepted at the 0.05 level and was 
performed using SPSS v12. Alpha diversity and richness indices 
(Observed-species, Chao1, Shannon, Simpson, ACE, Goods-coverage) 
were estimated using QIIME2 version 2022.11[40].
Fig. 1. NH4
+ oxidation and Fe (II) production after 120-day incubations with various PFAS.
S. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Hazardous Materials 480 (2024) 136426 
4

## Page 5

3. Results and discussion
3.1. Feammox activity in A6 enrichment incubations with various PFAAs
Feammox activity was evaluated by tracking NH4
+ oxidation and iron 
reduction (production of Fe (II)), as well as the changes in the abun­
dance of Acidimicrobium sp. A6 during the incubations [27]. In the in­
cubations without PFAAs, about 51.1%−62.2% of NH4
+ was removed 
during the 120-day incubations (Fig. 1c). In the incubations amended 
with 10 ppm C4-C10 PFCAs or PFSAs, the NH4
+ removal ranged from 
28.3% to 49.6% after 120 days of incubation, except for the incubations 
spiked with PFHxA and PFPeA, which exhibited a lower NH4
+ removal of 
11.7% and 9.9%, respectively (Fig. 1a). In cultures amended with the 
various PFOA/PFOS isomers at concentrations of 100 ppb, 29.3%−
56.7% NH4
+ was removed during incubations, except for incubations 
spiked with 3,5-PFOA, 3,5-PFOS, and 5,5-PFOS, which had NH4
+
removal of less than 10% (Fig. 1b). The background concentration of Fe 
(II), which was due to carryover from the inoculation with the A6 
enrichment culture, ranged from 3.9 mg/L to 11.8 mg/L and was 
determined prior to initiating the incubations. After 120 days of incu­
bation, Fe(II) increased by more than an order of magnitude, up to 
198.2 mg/L-300.9 mg/L in the no PFAA incubations, and 77.2 
mg/L-287.4 mg/L in samples spiked with the different PFAAs. In the 
abiotic controls, neither NH4
+ removal nor Fe(II) production was 
observed over the incubation time (Fig. 1a,b).
Comparing the total microbial abundance in cultures with different 
treatments after 120 days shows that cultures with PFAAs generally had 
lower overall microbial abundance than the no PFAS controls. After 
inoculation on day 0, the initial A6 numbers in the incubations ranged 
from 0.1 x 107 copies/mL to 0.6 x 107 copies/mL, with A6 consisting of 
56.1% ~ 65.2% of the total bacterial population (Fig. 2). During the 
120-day incubation, changes in the number and proportion of A6 varied 
between experiments with different PFAA treatments. Overall, the per­
centage of A6 in total microbial abundance increased, especially in in­
cubation with PFAAs, as shown in Fig. 2. This increase in both the 
quantity and proportion of A6 in all treatments indicates that, despite 
PFAS impacting Feammox activity, A6 continues to thrive and becomes 
the predominant species in this enrichment culture when exposed to 
these compounds. This suggests that PFAAs may have a positive impact 
on the overall numbers of certain microorganisms that can tolerate 
them, with A6 being a prime example of such resilience.
3.2. Potential Defluorination of C4-C10 PFCAs and PFSAs
Whereas sorption of PFOS onto ferrihydrite is important in DI water, 
it was shown to be negligible in the Feammox growth medium [46], and 
no loss due to sorption in the incubation vials with the Feammox me­
dium was observed for PFOA and PFOS in the incubations described by 
Huang and Jaff´e , 2019 [26]. Additionally, the removal of PFAAs was 
quantified by comparing their concentrations in the biologically active 
vials to those in vials containing medium and ferrihydrite but lacking an 
active Feammox process. After 120 days of incubation, the concentra­
tion of PFCAs and PFSAs did not show a significant change, and no 
significant increases (p > 0.1) in F- were observed in the samples from 
the abiotic control groups (Fig. 3), indicating that these PFAAs did not 
degrade abiotically under the conditions tested in this experiment. 
Although not shown here, previous incubations with Geobacter sp. in a 
Feammox medium with acetate, showed that as the ferrihydrite phase 
was being reduced and slowly converted to magnetite, there were no 
abiotic transformations of PFOA/PFOS, nor changed in sorption [26] in 
that specific growth medium. In the incubations with the active 
enrichment culture, the concentrations of the various C4-C10 PFCAs 
decreased over the 120-day anaerobic incubations (Fig. 3), except for 
PFPeA, for which the concentration did not show a statistically signifi­
cant decrease in concentration with time. In these PFCAs degradation 
experiments, the concentration of the long-chain PFCAs (PFDA and 
PFOA, Fig. 3) decreased the most during the 120-day incubation 
(6.63 mg/L and 5.91 mg/L, respectively), followed by PFHpA 
(5.63 mg/L) (Fig. 3a). Of the PFSA incubations, the PFOS concentration 
decreased 3.99 mg/L after 120 days of incubation, which was higher 
than the decrease in the concentration of PFBS and PFHxS (1.89 mg/L 
and 1.49 mg/L, respectively) (Fig. 3b).
The production of F- is an indicator for the PFAA defluorination 
process (Fig. 3). For experiments where the pH was controlled carefully, 
and intermediates measured, a fluorine balance has been achieved 
during the degradation of PFOA and PFOS [26]. No additional fluorine 
balance was performed here since intermediates were not measured in 
all incubations and the pH was not controlled. Although a comprehen­
sive analysis of the F- balance was absent, this experiment showed a 
clear correlation between F- production and PFAA decrease. A more 
substantial increase in F- was observed in the incubation containing 
long-chain PFAAs. These findings also reveal that within the A6 
enrichment culture, most C4-C10 PFAAs were subjected to differing 
Fig. 2. A6 numbers after 120-day incubations in the presence of different PFAS. (Results of day 0 and the no PFAS control were included).
S. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Hazardous Materials 480 (2024) 136426 
5

## Page 6

extents of degradation or removal. Additionally, this suggests that the 
shorter carbon-chain PFAAs generated during the degradation of 
PFOA/PFOS are likely intermediates and not final products.
The decrease in PFPeA concentration, shown in Fig. 3a, was not 
statistically significant throughout the 120-day incubation period, 
although there was a minor production of F- observed (~60 ppb). The 
distinct degradation pattern of PFPeA, in contrast to other examined 
PFCAs, prompted further investigation into the structure of the PFPeA 
monomer. To confirm its linearity, F NMR analysis was conducted, 
verifying that the PFPeA monomer used was linear. The specific path­
ways of PFPeA degradation remain unclear. Previous research has 
shown that the degradation of PFOA can result in the formation of 
various shorter-chain PFAAs, with PFBA frequently appearing at similar 
or greater concentrations compared to PFPeA [26,29,30,33]. Given the 
slower degradation rate of PFPeA relative to PFBA reported here, this 
suggests that PFBA formation might not solely occur through sequential 
carbon chain shortening but could also involve cleavage within the 
PFOA carbon chain. To determine the location of the PFOA carbon that 
is being defluorinated, samples from incubations where H-PFOA pro­
duction was observed were analyzed via a method that combines nano 
electrospray ionization and high-resolution mass spectrometry (Nano-­
ESI-HRMS) [47]. Results of these analyses indicate that the defluorina­
tion of PFOA by A6 may occur at the α carbon as well as the ε or δ 
carbons, which are also the carbons with the lower C-F energy bonds 
[48]. The weaker signal for defluorination at the α carbon than that for 
the ε or δ carbons could mean that either less defluorination occurred on 
that carbon or that this H-PFOA was more reactive and hence its con­
centration was lower.
It was hypothesized, based on previous experimental results 
comparing PFOA and PFOS defluorination by a relatively pure A6 cul­
ture and an A6 enrichment culture, that A6 can partially defluorinate a 
PFAA molecule, after which other organisms can then degrade this 
partially defluorinated compound further [31]. Then, based on the 
findings that defluorination of PFOA can occur at the α carbon, the 
partially defluorinated compound could undergo a decarboxylation via 
breakage of the respective carbon-carbon bond, followed by a carbox­
ylation of this seven-carbon intermediate compound, producing PFHpA. 
At the same time the PFOA molecule is also defluorinated at the ε or δ 
carbon, resulting in the production of PFBA, which would explain the 
higher buildup of PFBA than PFPeA. As shown in the results presented 
here, PFPeA degrades much slower than PFBA, and a higher buildup of 
PFBA could not be explained via a gradual decrease in the carbon chain 
length. As of now, we have not been able to detect intermediate com­
pounds that are able to verify this pathway, and further research is 
needed to demonstrate this mechanism.
Although the location of the carbon that was defluorinated was not 
investigated, the production of H-PFHpA, H-PFHxA, H-PFPeA, and HPFBA was also observed in incubations with mixtures of PFHpA, PFHxA, 
PFPeA, and PFBA [48]. Hence, we hypothesize that in A6 enrichment 
culture incubations, as described above, PFAAs can gradually undergo 
defluorination on the α carbon, followed by decarboxylation and then 
carboxylation, resulting in the next shorter carbon-chain length PFAA.
3.3. Defluorination of branched vs. linear PFOA and PFOS
During the 120-day incubations of various PFOA isomers at a 
Fig. 3. Change in concentration of PFAS and F- after 120-day incubations with PFCAs or PFSAs.
S. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Hazardous Materials 480 (2024) 136426 
6

## Page 7

concentration of 100 ppb, cultures supplemented with the 3,5- and 4,5PFOA isomers did not show a change in concentration of these PFOA 
monomers, with no statistical difference in the PFOA concentrations 
between the biologically active vials and their respective autoclaved and 
medium controls. Conversely, in incubations that involved linear and 
single-branched PFOA isomers, a decrease in the PFOA concentration 
from 17.2% to 46.2% was observed over the 120-day incubation period, 
as shown in Fig. 4a. The results for the PFOS incubations mirrored the 
observations made with PFOA to some extent. PFOS removal ranged 
from 14.5% to 40.1% over a 120-day period for incubations, as illus­
trated in Fig. 4c, and as was the case for the double-branched PFOA 
monomers, the double-branched PFOS isomers, 3,5- and 5,5-PFOS did 
not exhibit a significant decrease in concentration over the incubation 
time, nor when compared to the abiotic controls by the end of the in­
cubation period, as shown in Fig. 4d. When conducting experiments 
with lower PFAA concentrations, particularly those focused on the 
different linear vs. branched PFOA and PFOS monomers, it was observed 
that the F- production remained below 60 ppb. This value is close to the 
F- background concentration, thus rendering accurate quantification of 
F- challenging, although the measured F- production may still be used as 
an additional indicator of PFOA and PFOS defluorination. In these in­
cubations, it is observed that the concentrations of individual PFOA or 
PFOS isomers remained unchanged after a 120-day incubation in the 
abiotic control groups. As depicted in Figs. 4b and 4d, this consistency 
emphasizes that under the conditions tested, no notable abiotic degra­
dation or transformation of either PFOA or PFOS occurred.
In summary, these results indicate that linear and single-branched 
PFOA and PFOS isomers undergo degradation over time, which is sup­
ported by the observed decrease in concentration and concomitant Fproduction. However, the double-branched PFOA and PFOS isomers 
remain notably stable throughout the 120-day incubation period, 
exhibiting no significant production of F-. The underlying reason for this 
stability in double-branched isomers remains elusive. Yet, it’s 
noteworthy that the Feammox reaction exhibited diminished activity in 
the presence of these double-branched isomers compared to their linear 
counterparts, as evidenced in Fig. 1. Interestingly, the biodegradation of 
PFOS observed in this study was similar for both linear and singlebranched isomers of PFOS (Fig. 3). This is different from the typically 
abiotic degradation pathway of PFOS, where linear isomers typically 
remain largely unchanged in comparison to their branched counterparts 
[49,50].
3.4. Effect of PFAAs on the microbial community dynamics in these 
enrichment culture incubations
To investigate how the presence of different PFAAs affects the mi­
crobial communities of A6 enrichment cultures, and whether different 
PFAAs have different effects on their compositions, high throughput 16S 
rRNA gene sequencing was performed for both the control without 
PFAAs and the incubations with various PFCAs/PFSAs at different times.
Sequencing of the 16S rRNA produced a total of 926057 reads, and 
more than 86% of the sequences were retained from each sample after 
quality trimming and chimera checking (Table S3). Microbiome ana­
lyses showed Ferrimicrobium as the dominant genus for most conditions, 
especially at 120 days, with relative abundances ranging from 64% for 
the no-PFAA incubation, up to 87% for the enrichments with PFBS 
(Fig. 5). BLAST of this Ferrimicrobium ASV against the one from Acid­
imicrobium sp. A6 (NCBI ID MG589453, [27]) showed 100% sequences’ 
similarity, confirming the importance of A6 as primary member of the 
microbial community involved in PFAA degradation. Additionally, A6 
was the ASV with the highest statistical correlation (P-value = 0.006) 
with F- production. At the same time, several other genera were enriched 
during the course of the incubations, sometimes only transiently, espe­
cially at 60 days. Among these, the genus Paraburkholderia was often 
present at ~10%−15% relative abundance in most of the enrichments, 
except the ones with C4-PFAA (PFBS and PFBA) and was significantly 
0.00
0.05
0.10
L-PFOA
3-PFOA
4-PFOA
3,5-PFOA
4,5-PFOA
Change in concentrations of PFAS (mg/L)
0.00
0.05
0.10
Change in concentrations of F- (mg/L)
0.00
0.05
0.10
L-PFOS
3-PFOS
4-PFOS
3,5-PFOS
5,5-PFOS
Change in concentrations of PFAS (mg/L)
0.00
0.05
0.10
Change in concentrations of F- (mg/L)
a 
b
Fig. 4. Change in concentration of PFAS and F- after 120-day incubations with PFOA and PFOS isomers.
S. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Hazardous Materials 480 (2024) 136426 
7

## Page 8

correlated with F- production (P = 0.009). Moreover, Paraburkholderia 
became dominant, reaching 56% of relative abundance in the enrich­
ments with PFOA at 60 days. Interestingly, the genome of the genus 
Paraburkholderia contains genes coding for 2 different dehalogenases, 
including a (S)−2-haloacid dehalogenase, which has been recently 
found to be involved in PFOA degradation in Delftia acidovorans [51], as 
well the gene crcB, coding for an ion channel linked to F- export (http 
s://www.genome.jp/dbget-bin/www_bget?bxb:DR64_551), plus other 
genes specific for haloacid transport [52]. The enrichment with PFOA at 
60 days was also characterized by a generally higher diversity (Table S3) 
and by the appearance of specific lineages, such as Rhodanobacter (~6 % 
relative abundance), which was recently reported among 11 genera to 
show significant correlations (P < 0.05) with soil PFAS levels [53], and 
in our study showed a high correlation with F- production (P = 0.008). 
As above mentioned, C4-PFAAs did show minimal presence of Para­
burkholderia but, instead, where characterized by higher relative abun­
dance (7–10 %), of the genus Cupriavidus. Intriguingly, a recent study by 
Liu et al. [54] showed the strain W12 of this genus involved in F- pre­
cipitation through Microbially Induced Calcium Carbonate Precipita­
tion. What makes this observation quite remarkable, is that the strain 
W12 was cultured in Liu et al. work with succinate as carbon source, 
possibly pointing to a high affinity for this genus to C4 compounds, 
eventually in synergy with A6 defluorination capabilities [51]. Addi­
tional relevant genera include the Firmicutes sulfate reducer Desulfo­
sporosinus, and the biomass degrader Cellulomonas, both particularly 
enriched (up to 11 % and 9 % relative abundance, respectively) in the 
no PFAA controls as well as in the PFOS enrichments, especially at 60 
days. The enrichment without PFAAs at 60 days also show the genus 
Neobacillus, normally below 1 % in the other enrichments, raising to 8 % 
in relative abundance, possibly confirming the role of Bacillales as gen­
eralists in xenobiotic degradation [55]. Finally, the genus Achromo­
bacter, which was recently reported among the members of a microbial 
community from PFAS-impacted soil amended with iron [56] was 
retrieved up to 2 % in relative abundance especially in the 60 days en­
richments with PFOS and PFOA, and also showed significant correlation 
with F- production (P = 0.02).
4. Conclusions
In this study, we conclude that Acidimicrobium sp. A6 enrichment 
cultures are capable to biodegrade and biodefluorinate a wide range of 
PFAAs as demonstrated by the decrease in PFAA concentration and in­
crease in F- concentration over time as compared to the abiotic controls. 
These results also show that the shorter carbon-chain PFAAs produced 
during the degradation of PFOA/PFOS are likely intermediates and not 
final products. However, certain PFAAs, such as PFPeA, doublebranched PFCAs and PFSAs presented challenges in biodegradation by 
the A6 enrichment culture, thereby indicating the necessity for further 
investigation into the underlying enzymatic mechanisms. Furthermore, 
the incubation with PFAAs led to a noticeable shift in the microbial 
community, characterized by an increase in heterotrophic populations. 
This suggests that some microorganisms might utilize energy from 
oxidizing the carbon-carbon bonds in partially defluorinated PFAAs. It 
also opens the possibility that specific bacteria may directly engage in or 
facilitate pathways leading to PFAS degradation. This is evidenced by 
the presence of multiple organisms that become more dominant in the 
Fig. 5. The 20 most abundant bacterial genera in A6 enrichment cultures amended with 10 ppm PFAS for 120 days incubations.
S. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Hazardous Materials 480 (2024) 136426 
8

## Page 9

enrichment culture and that have been associated with PFAS degrada­
tion or with PFAS impacted sites.
Employing a multifaceted evidence approach, which integrates 
target measurements (i.e., PFAS), geochemistry (i.e., ammonium 
oxidation, iron reduction, fluoride), and molecular biological tools (e.g., 
qPCR targeting the 16S rRNA gene or reductive dehalogenases), en­
hances the accuracy in detecting ongoing biological processes and im­
proves the monitoring of biodegradation or biodefluorination at the 
field-scale, as previously described [57–59]. However, to address the 
challenges posed by lower environmental concentrations (ng/L to µg/L) 
and complex environmental matrices in the field, there is a pressing 
need to refine these methodologies and assays. Despite these challenges, 
utilizing such a comprehensive approach strengthens the interpretation 
of laboratory data and outlines potential strategies for monitoring these 
biological processes in situ.
Environmental implications
It has been shown that Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 (A6) is capable of 
degrading PFAAs such as PFOA and PFOA and that the production if 
shorter carbon chain PFAAs is being observed during this process. Here 
we show that these shorter carbon-chain PFAAs are also degradable and 
do not build up, indicating the potential for complete degradation of 
PFOA/PFOS by A6. Either much slower or no degradation was observed 
for PFPeA and double branched PFOA/PFOS monomers, indicating that 
these PFAAs will be much more challenging to degrade in potential A6 
based bioremediation schemes.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Shan Huang: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Methodology, 
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Peter R Jaffe: Writing – 
review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Project adminis­
tration, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptu­
alization. Giovanni Pilloni: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, 
Formal analysis. Trent A. Key: Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal re­
lationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: 
Peter Jaffe reports financial support and writing assistance were pro­
vided by ExxonMobil Technology and Engineering Company. Shan 
Huang reports was provided by Princeton University. Peter Jaffe reports 
a relationship with ExxonMobil Technology and Engineering Company 
that includes: funding grants. If there are other authors, they declare 
that they have no known competing financial interests or personal re­
lationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in 
this paper.
Acknowledgements
Partial funding for this effort was provided by a grant from Exxon­
Mobil Environmental and Property Solutions Company.
Appendix A. Supporting information
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the 
online version at doi:10.1016/j.jhazmat.2024.136426.
Data Availability
DNA sequences are available from the NCBI Sequence Read Archive 
under BioProject PRJNA1140605. Other data will be made available on 
request. 
References
[1] Charbonnet, J.A., Rodowa, A.E., Joseph, N.T., Guelfo, J.L., Field, J.A., Jones, G.D., 
et al., 2021. Environmental source tracking of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances 
within a forensic context: current and future techniques. Environ Sci Technol 55, 
7237–7245. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.0c08506.
[2] Lyu, X., Xiao, F., Shen, C., Chen, J., Park, C.M., Sun, Y., et al., 2022. Per- and 
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) in subsurface environments: occurrence, fate, 
transport, and research prospect. Rev Geophys 60. https://doi.org/10.1029/ 
2021rg000765.
[3] Houtz, E.F., Higgins, C.P., Field, J.A., Sedlak, D.L., 2013. Persistence of 
perfluoroalkyl acid precursors in AFFF-impacted groundwater and soil. Environ Sci 
Technol 47, 8187–8195. https://doi.org/10.1021/es4018877.
[4] Brusseau, M.L., Anderson, R.H., Guo, B., 2020. PFAS concentrations in soils: 
Background levels versus contaminated sites. Sci Total Environ 740, 140017. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.140017.
[5] Nakayama, S.F., Yoshikane, M., Onoda, Y., Nishihama, Y., Iwai-Shimada, M., 
Takagi, M., et al., 2019. Worldwide trends in tracing poly- and perfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFAS) in the environment. TrAC Trends Anal Chem 121, 115410. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trac.2019.02.011.
[6] Cousins, I.T., Johansson, J.H., Salter, M.E., Sha, B., Scheringer, M., 2022. Outside 
the Safe Operating Space of a New Planetary Boundary for Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances (PFAS). Environ Sci Technol 56, 11172–11179. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.est.2c02765.
[7] Khan, B., Burgess, R.M., Cantwell, M.G., 2023. Occurrence and bioaccumulation 
patterns of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in the marine environment. 
ACS EST Water 3, 1243–1259. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsestwater.2c00296.
[8] Tang, L., Su, C., Fan, C., Li, R., Wang, Y., Gao, S., et al., 2022. Long-term effect of 
perfluorooctanoic acid on the anammox system based on metagenomics: 
Performance, sludge characteristic and microbial community dynamic. Bioresour 
Technol 351, 127002. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2022.127002.
[9] Tang, Z., Song, X., Xu, M., Yao, J., Ali, M., Wang, Q., et al., 2022. Effects of cooccurrence of PFASs and chlorinated aliphatic hydrocarbons on microbial 
communities in groundwater: A field study. J Hazard Mater 435, 128969. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2022.128969.
[10] Huang, D., Xu, R., Sun, X., Li, Y., Xiao, E., Xu, Z., et al., 2022. Effects of 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) on activated sludge microbial community under 
aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Environ Sci Pollut Res 29, 63379–63392. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-022-18841-8.
[11] Tang, Z., Vogel, T.M., Wang, Q., Wei, C., Ali, M., Song, X., 2024. Microbial 
defluorination of TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA by a native microbial consortium 
under anoxic conditions. J Hazard Mater 465, 133217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jhazmat.2023.133217.
[12] Chen, C., Fang, Y., Zhou, D., 2023. Selective pressure of PFOA on microbial 
community: enrichment of denitrifiers harboring ARGs and the transfer of ferricelectrons. Water Res 233, 119813. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2023.119813.
[13] Cao, L., Xu, W., Wan, Z., Li, G., Zhang, F., 2022. Occurrence of PFASs and its effect 
on soil bacteria at a fire-training area using PFOS-restricted aqueous film-forming 
foams. iScience 25, 104084. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2022.104084.
[14] Choi, G., Kan, E., 2024. Effects of perfluorooctanoic acid and perfluorooctane 
sulfonic acid on microbial community structure during anaerobic digestion. 
Bioresour Technol 393, 129999. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2023.129999.
[15] Wackett, L.P., 2022. Nothing lasts forever: understanding microbial 
biodegradation of polyfluorinated compounds and perfluorinated alkyl substances. 
Microb Biotechnol 15, 773–792. https://doi.org/10.1111/1751-7915.13928.
[16] Che, S., Jin, B., Liu, Z., Yu, Y., Liu, J., Men, Y., 2021. Structure-specific aerobic 
defluorination of short-chain fluorinated carboxylic acids by activated sludge 
communities. Environ Sci Technol Lett 8, 668–674. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
estlett.1c00511.
[17] Stasinakis, A.S., 2012. Review on the fate of emerging contaminants during sludge 
anaerobic digestion. Bioresour Technol 121, 432–440. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biortech.2012.06.074.
[18] Sun, M., Cui, J., Guo, J., Zhai, Z., Zuo, P., Zhang, J., 2020. Fluorochemicals 
biodegradation as a potential source of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to the 
environment. Chemosphere 254, 126894. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chemosphere.2020.126894.
[19] Zhang, S., Lu, X., Wang, N., Buck, R.C., 2016. Biotransformation potential of 6:2 
fluorotelomer sulfonate (6:2 FTSA) in aerobic and anaerobic sediment. 
Chemosphere 154, 224–230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chemosphere.2016.03.062.
[20] Kwon, B.G., Lim, H.-J., Na, S.-H., Choi, B.-I., Shin, D.-S., Chung, S.-Y., 2014. 
Biodegradation of perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) as an emerging contaminant. 
Chemosphere 109, 221–225. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chemosphere.2014.01.072.
[21] Chetverikov, S.P., Sharipov, D.A., Korshunova, T.Yu, Loginov, O.N., 2017. 
Degradation of perfluorooctanyl sulfonate by strain Pseudomonas plecoglossicida 
2.4-D. Appl Biochem Microbiol 53, 533–538. https://doi.org/10.1134/ 
s0003683817050027.
[22] Yi, L.B., Chai, L.Y., Xie, Y., Peng, Q.J., Peng, Q.Z., 2016. Isolation, identification, 
and degradation performance of a PFOA-degrading strain. Genet Mol Res 15. 
https://doi.org/10.4238/gmr.15028043.
[23] Chetverikov, S., Hkudaygulov, G., Sharipov, D., Starikov, S., Chetverikova, D., 
2023. Biodegradation potential of C7-C10 perfluorocarboxylic acids and data from 
the genome of a new strain of pseudomonas mosselii 5(3). Toxics 11, 1001. https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/toxics11121001.
S. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Hazardous Materials 480 (2024) 136426 
9

## Page 10

[24] Chiriac, F.L., Stoica, C., Iftode, C., Pirvu, F., Petre, V.A., Paun, I., et al., 2023. 
Bacterial Biodegradation of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorosulfonic 
acid (PFOS) using pure pseudomonas strains. Sustainability 15, 14000. https://doi. 
org/10.3390/su151814000.
[25] Shaw, D.M.J., Munoz, G., Bottos, E.M., Duy, S.V., Sauv´e, S., Liu, J., et al., 2019. 
Degradation and defluorination of 6:2 fluorotelomer sulfonamidoalkyl betaine and 
6:2 fluorotelomer sulfonate by Gordonia sp. strain NB4-1Y under sulfur-limiting 
conditions. Sci Total Environ 647, 690–698. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2018.08.012.
[26] Huang, S., Jaffé, P.R., 2019. Defluorination of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and 
perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) by Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6. Environ Sci 
Technol 53, 11410–11419. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.9b04047.
[27] Huang, S., Jaff´e, P.R., 2018. Isolation and characterization of an ammoniumoxidizing iron reducer: acidimicrobiaceae sp. A6. PLOS ONE 13, e0194007. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0194007.
[28] Huang, S., Sima, M., Long, Y., Messenger, C., Jaff´e, P.R., 2022. Anaerobic 
degradation of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in biosolids by Acidimicrobium sp. 
strain A6. J Hazard Mater 424, 127699. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jhazmat.2021.127699.
[29] Ruiz-Urigüen, M., Shuai, W., Huang, S., Jaff´e, P.R., 2022. Biodegradation of PFOA 
in microbial electrolysis cells by Acidimicrobiaceae sp. strain A6. Chemosphere 
292, 133506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2021.133506.
[30] Park, J., Huang, S., Koel, B.E., Jaff´e, P.R., 2023. Enhanced Feammox activity and 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) degradation by Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 using 
PAA-coated ferrihydrite as an electron acceptor. J Hazard Mater 459, 132039. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2023.132039.
[31] Jaff´e, P.R., Huang, S., Park, J., Ruiz-Urigüen, M., Shuai, W., Sima, M., 2024. 
Defluorination of PFAS by Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6 and potential applications 
for remediation. Methods Enzym. https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.mie.2024.01.013.
[32] Sima, M.W., Huang, S., Jaff´e, P.R., 2023. Modeling the kinetics of 
perfluorooctanoic and perfluorooctane sulfonic acid biodegradation by 
Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 during the feammox process. J Hazard Mater 448, 
130903. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2023.130903.
[33] P.R. Jaff´e, S. Huang, M.W. Sima, I. Ross, J..Liu, Biotransformation and Potential 
Mineralization of PFOS, PFHxS, and PFOA by Acidimicrobiaceae sp. A6 under Iron 
Reducing Conditions. Final Report. SERDP Project ER20–1219, (2021), 〈https://se 
rdp-estcp-storage.s3.us-gov-west-1.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/2023–09/ER20 
–1219%20-%20Final%20Report.pdf?VersionId=nfXmzpuq6r8mDLFJovSyVXmp 
fTqOz.db〉.
[34] EPA, 2018. 〈https://www.epa.gov/pfas/basic-information-pfas〉.
[35] Shimadzu 2023. Analysis of 28 Common PFAS Compounds using Compact Single 
Quadrupole LCMS-2050. Application News SSI-LCMS-149.
[36] J.A. Shoemaker, P. Grimmett, B. Boutin, Determination of Selected Perfluorinated 
Alkyl Acids in Drinking Water by Solid Phase Extraction and Liquid 
Chromatography/Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC/MS/MS); Washington, DC, 
(2008).
[37] Yamamoto, A., Hisatomi, H., Ando, T., Takemine, S., Terao, T., Tojo, T., et al., 
2014. Use of high-resolution mass spectrometry to identify precursors and 
biodegradation products of perfluorinated and polyfluorinated compounds in enduser products. Anal Bioanal Chem 406, 4745–4755. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00216-014-7862-0.
[38] Stookey, L.L., 1970. Ferrozine—a new spectrophotometric reagent for iron. Anal 
Chem 42, 779–781. https://doi.org/10.1021/ac60289a016.
[39] Caporaso, J.G., Lauber, C.L., Walters, W.A., Berg-Lyons, D., Huntley, J., Fierer, N., 
et al., 2012. Ultra-high-throughput microbial community analysis on the Illumina 
HiSeq and MiSeq platforms. ISME J 6, 1621–1624. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
ismej.2012.8.
[40] Bolyen, E., et al., 2019. Reproducible, interactive, scalable and extensible 
microbiome data science using QIIME 2. Nat Biotechnol 37, 852–857. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/s41587-019-0209-9.
[41] McDonald, D., Jiang, Y., Balaban, M., Cantrell, K., Zhu, Q., Gonzalez, A., et al., 
2023. Greengenes2 unifies microbial data in a single reference tree. Nat Biotechnol 
1–4. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-023-01845-1.
[42] Zhang, Z., Schwartz, S., Wagner, L., Miller, W., 2000. A greedy algorithm for 
aligning DNA sequences. J Comput Biol: A J Comput Mol Cell Biol 7, 203–214. 
https://doi.org/10.1089/10665270050081478.
[43] Persson, F., Sultana, R., Suarez, M., Hermansson, M., Plaza, E., Wil´en, B.-M., 2014. 
Structure and composition of biofilm communities in a moving bed biofilm reactor 
for nitritation–anammox at low temperatures. Bioresour Technol 154, 267–273. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2013.12.062.
[44] Huang, S., Chen, C., Jaff´e, P.R., 2018. Seasonal distribution of nitrifiers and 
denitrifies in urban river sediments affected by agricultural activities. Sci Total 
Environ 642, 1282–1291. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.06.116.
[45] Chester, A.L.H., Gallagher, N., Huang, S., Jaff´e, P.R., Novak, P.J., 2023. 
Stormwater applications of zeolite-coated biofilm carriers for ammonium removal 
with possible applications to PFAS biotransformation. Environ Sci: Water Res 
Technol 9, 3227–3242. https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ew00101f.
[46] Jaffé, P.R., Huang, S., 2023. Rebuttal to correspondence on “defluorination of 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS) by 
acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6. Environ Sci Technol 57, 20443–20447. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acs.est.3c07853.
[47] Wu, C., Wang, Q., Chen, H., Li, M., 2022. Rapid quantitative analysis and suspect 
screening of per-and polyfluorinated alkyl substances (PFASs) in aqueous filmforming foams (AFFFs) and municipal wastewater samples by Nano-ESI-HRMS. 
Water Res 219, 118542.
[48] Jaff´e, P.R., S. Huang, C. Smorada, M. Li, B. Su, C. Schaefer, Biotransformation and 
Potential Mineralization of PFOS, PFHxS, and PFOA by Acidimicrobiaceae sp. A6 
under Iron Reducing Conditions, Phase II” SERDP Project ER20–1219, 2024.
[49] Battye, N.J., Patch, D.J., Roberts, D.M.D., O’Connor, N.M., Turner, L.P., Kueper, B. 
H., et al., 2022. Use of a horizontal ball mill to remediate per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances in soil. Sci Total Environ 835, 155506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2022.155506.
[50] Ochoa-Herrera, V., Sierra-Alvarez, R., Somogyi, A., Jacobsen, N.E., Wysocki, V.H., 
Field, J.A., 2008. Reductive Defluorination of Perfluorooctane Sulfonate. Environ 
Sci Technol 42, 3260–3264. https://doi.org/10.1021/es702842q.
[51] Harris, J.D., Coon, C.M., Doherty, M.E., McHugh, E.A., Warner, M.C., Walters, C.L., 
et al., 2022. Engineering and characterization of dehalogenase enzymes from 
Delftia acidovorans in bioremediation of perfluorinated compounds. Synth Syst 
Biotechnol 7, 671–676. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2022.02.005.
[52] Su, X., Shi, Y., Li, R., Lu, Z.-N., Zou, X., Wu, J.-X., et al., 2019. Application of qPCR 
assays based on haloacids transporter gene dehp2 for discrimination of 
Burkholderia and Paraburkholderia. BMC Microbiol 19, 36. https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s12866-019-1411-0.
[53] S.T.M.L.D. Senevirathna, K.C.B., Krishna, R., Mahinroosta, A., Sathasivan, 2022. 
Comparative characterization of microbial communities that inhabit PFAS-rich 
contaminated sites: a case-control study. J Hazard Mater 423, 126941. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.126941.
[54] Liu, J., Su, J., Ali, A., Wang, Z., Zhang, R., 2022. Potential of a novel facultative 
anaerobic denitrifying Cupriavidus sp. W12 to remove fluoride and calcium 
through calcium bioprecipitation. J Hazard Mater 423, 126976. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.126976.
[55] Arora, P.K., 2020. Bacilli-mediated degradation of xenobiotic compounds and 
heavy metals. Front Bioeng Biotechnol 8, 570307. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fbioe.2020.570307.
[56] Wu, J., Hua, Z., Liang, Z., Gu, L., 2023. Impacts of iron amendments and perfluoroalkyl substances’ bio-availability to the soil microbiome in wheat ecosystem. 
Chemosphere 311, 137140. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2022.137140.
[57] USEPA. Use of Monitored Natural Attenuation at Superfund, RCRA Corrective 
Action, and Underground Storage Tank Sites. OSWER Directive (1999) 
9200.4–17P.
[58] ASTM International. ASTM E3354 Standard Guide for Application of Molecular 
Biological Tools to Assess Biological Processes at Contaminated Sites, (2022), DOI: 
10.1520/E3354–22.
[59] Key, T.A., Sorsby, S.J., Wang, Y., Madison, A.S., 2022. Framework for field-scale 
application of molecular biological tools to support natural and enhanced 
bioremediation. Front Microbiol 13, 958742. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fmicb.2022.958742.
S. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Hazardous Materials 480 (2024) 136426 
10

