# 1-s2.0-S0048969724069584-main

**Source PDF**: 1-s2.0-S0048969724069584-main.pdf

---

## Page 1

Stimulating Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 in iron-rich, acidic sediments from
AFFF-impacted sites for PFAS defluorination
Shan Huang a, Chiara Smorada a, Charles E. Schaefer b, Peter R. Jaff´e a,*
a Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, United States of America
b CDM Smith, 110 Fieldcrest Avenue, #8, 6th Floor, Edison, NJ 08837, United States of America
H I G H L I G H T S
G R A P H I C A L A B S T R A C T
• Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 (A6) has
been shown to defluorinate PFAAs.
• A6 is present at some acidic iron-rich
AFFF-impacted
sites
and
can
be
stimulated.
• This stimulation results in degradation
of PFOA/PFOS and production of F−.
• It also results in an increased expression
of
dehalogenase
and
F−
transporter
genes.
• The presence of PFAS affects the microbial community composition.
A R T I C L E I N F O
Editor: Jose Julio Ortega-Calvo
Keywords:
Feammox
Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6
Biostimulation
PFAS
PFOA
PFOS
Biodegradation
Soils
Sediments
A B S T R A C T
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are persistent and bioaccumulative contaminants that are widely
used in industrial applications and consumer products and pose significant risks to ecosystems and human health.
Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 (A6), which is common in acidic, and iron rich soils and sediments is capable of both
anaerobic ammonium (NH4
+) oxidation under iron reduction (Feammox) and defluorination of perfluorinated
alkyl substances, such as perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs). This study investigates the potential for biostimulating A6
via the supply of NH4
+ and ferric iron (Fe(III)) with the goal of defluorinating PFAAs. Sediment samples from
acidic, iron-rich, AFFF (aqueous film forming foam) impacted sites were collected and incubated with added Fe
(III) and NH4
+. Quantitative PCR was used to track A6 numbers as well as dehalogenase and F−ion transporter
genes during these incubations; changes in the microbial community structure were tracked through 16S rRNA
gene sequencing. The findings reveal that the addition of Fe(III) and NH4
+ stimulated the Feammox reaction and
A6 growth and enhanced the degradation of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctane sulfonic acid
(PFOS). Results also show a significant presence and activity of the above-mentioned genes in these incubations.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: jaffe@princeton.edu (P.R. Jaff´e).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Science of the Total Environment
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/scitotenv
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.176801
Received 3 July 2024; Received in revised form 12 September 2024; Accepted 6 October 2024
Science of the Total Environment 955 (2024) 176801 
Available online 9 October 2024 
0048-9697/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/ ).

## Page 2

The insights gained from this study could inform bioremediation strategies for PFAS-contaminated environments,
especially in geochemical settings that favor the presence of A6.
1. Introduction
Many studies have focused on investigating soils contaminated with
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) to find PFAS-degrading microbes. However, most successful degradation of PFAS has been limited
to the less recalcitrant polyfluorinated compounds (LaFond et al., 2023).
PFAAs (perfluorinated alkyl acids) such as PFOA (perfluorooctanoic
acid) and PFOS (perfluorooctane sulfonic acid) are particularly difficult
to degrade (Smorada et al., 2024). These compounds have been linked to
health effects (US EPA, 2018), for which the US Environmental Protection Agency has set very low drinking water levels, and remediation
requirements (US EPA, 2024). Many other PFAAs monomers have been
reported at sites contaminated by aqueous film forming foams (AFFF),
these monomers may be part of the original AFFF formulation or might
have been produced from the degradation/biotransformation of polyfluorinated alkyl substances (Reinikainen et al., 2022).
Feammox, which couples ammonium oxidation to iron reduction,
has been observed globally in iron rich and acidic environments,
including wetland sediments, paddy soils, acidic soils, and river sediments (Huang and Jaff´e, 2018; Yi et al., 2019; Ahmed et al., 2021; Zhu
et al., 2022; Cerda et al., 2023; Sherman et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2024). In
these settings, the Feammox process is thought to play an important role
in the biogeochemical cycling of nitrogen (Yang et al., 2012; Ding et al.,
2021; Sherman et al., 2023). Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6, which is an
organism capable of conducting the Feammox process (Huang and Jaff´e,
2015, 2018; Jaff´e et al., 2024), has been identified in many acidic, iron
rich soils/sediments (Huang et al., 2016, Yi et al., 2019). Acidimicrobium
sp. Strain A6 has also been shown to defluorinate perfluorinated alkyl
substances (Huang and Jaff´e, 2019; Jaff´e et al., 2021; Ruiz-Urigüen
et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2022; Park et al., 2023; Sima et al., 2023; Jaff´e
et al., 2024). Hence, understanding how to stimulate the Feammox
process may become particularly important for remediating soils
contaminated with PFAS.
In addition to the degradation studies of PFAAs by Acidimicrobium sp.
Strain A6 mentioned above, only a few studies have to-date provided
convincing findings about the degradation of PFAAs in environmental
media (Smorada et al., 2024). In an anaerobic incubation with aquifer
solids sourced from a fluorochemical plant, Tang et al. (2024) reported
13.52 % removal of PFOA (5 mg/L) supported by fluoride production
and buildup of perfluoroheptanoic acid (PFHpA) and perfluorohexanoic
acid (PFHxA) during 10-month incubations. At the end of these incubations, Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes were the most abundant
phyla. The study points to decarboxylation and subsequent hydrolytic
elimination (Tang et al., 2024). Lorah et al. (2024) conducted anaerobic
sediment incubations with a known dehalogenating culture, WBC-2,
resulting in 46.4 % removal of PFOS when WBC-2 was incubated with
chlorinated volatile organic compounds (cVOC) as co-contaminants.
These results indicate that reductive defluorination of PFOS to nonfluorinated compounds or ultrashort-chain PFAS occurred over 45
days. A sediment incubation with added cVOCs, but without the WBC-2
culture, exhibited 25.5 % removal of PFOS. Although the PFOS removal
was lower than the incubations with the WBC-2 culture, these sediment
incubations suggest PFOS removal may occur naturally with the native
microbes in the PFAS-impacted sediment. Fluoride analyses were not
performed for these experiments (Lorah et al., 2024). PFOS biodegradation was accompanied by increased abundance of sulfate reducers,
suggesting biodegradation was initiated by desulfonation of the sulfurcontaining functional group. A small accumulation of perfluorohexane
sulfonate (PFHxS), perfluoropentane sulfonate (PFPeS), and perfluorobutane sulfonate (PFBS) was detected in the incubations with
WBC-2 and cVOCs (Lorah et al., 2024). In both biodegradation studies,
the bacteria cultures for these experiments were sourced from PFAScontaminated sites, which are more likely to contain PFAS-degrading
bacteria due to selective pressure (Wackett, 2024).
The objective of this study was to determine if Acidimicrobium sp.
Strain A6 is present at selected iron-rich, acidic, AFFF-impacted
Department of Defense (DoD) sites, and if so, if A6’s activity can be
stimulated via the addition of an Fe(III) source and/or NH4
+, and if this
biostimulation results in the defluorination of PFAAs, including PFOA
and PFOS. Furthermore, despite the increase in PFAS biodegradation
studies, a better understanding of the impacts of PFAS impacts on the
microbial community is warranted. Hence, an additional goal of this
study was to determine how the presence of PFAS from AFFF-impacted
soils may affect the microbial community structure.
To address these questions, a series of sediment batch incubations
were conducted to track degradation of selected PFAAs, formation of
degradation products, functional gene expression for enzymes that have
been linked to PFAS degradation, and microbial community shifts in the
presence of PFAS. Incubations used six distinct sediments, four from
AFFF-impacted DoD sites and two were co-located but not impacted by
AFFF. To determine the effect of higher PFAS concentrations and to
allow for better tracking of the F−
produced, incubations were also
performed with these sediments spiked with PFOA or PFOS.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Sediments used in the incubations
Low pH aquifers, that may favor the presence of A6 are common
throughout the Northern Atlantic Coastal Plain, ranging from Long Island, through most of North Carolina. Among 419 groundwater samples
collected by the USGS from this aquifer system, 60 % were reported to
have pH values of 5.5 or below (Denver et al., 2014). To conduct the
proposed incubations, sediment samples were collected by CDM Smith
from four different DoD sites located in the Northern Atlantic Coastal
Plain (Table 1). Samples were obtained from four AFFF-impacted sites,
and from two non-impacted locations near two of the AFFF-impacted
sites. Sediment from the non-impacted sites shared similar physiochemical soil properties with the nearby AFFF-impacted sediment.
Analyses reveal that the non-impacted sediments had a PFOS concentration of about an order of magnitude lower than the impacted sediments and a PFOA concentration of about 1/3 of the impacted
sediments. All sediment samples collected were surface sediments (<2
ft. below ground surface, bgs, and several feet above the water table),
and were collected using hand tools. All sediment samples were homogenized (coning and quartering) in the lab upon receipt. Sediment
samples were shipped and stored in sealed 5-gal buckets at room
temperature.
2.2. Setup of sediment incubation experiments
The incubation experiments were conducted using Sediments #I to
#VI (Table 1), to study the transformation and degradation of PFOA and
PFOS by native microbes during anaerobic incubations, with and
without the addition of NH4
+ and/or Fe(III), the electron donor and
acceptor required by Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6. To conduct these
incubations, 5 g of homogenized fresh undried sediment (original
moisture content provided in Table 1) and 30 mL of either DI water or a
Feammox medium (Huang and Jaff´e, 2019) were placed in 50 mL vials.
Incubation experiments were divided into four groups as detailed in
Table 2: Group 1, Condition A is the background group to which only DI
water was added; Group 2, Condition B includes nutrient amendments
S. Huang et al.
Science of the Total Environment 955 (2024) 176801 
2

## Page 3

with 2.8 mM of NH4
+, Condition C includes nutrient amendments with
10 mM of Fe(III), and Condition D with both NH4
+ and Fe(III); Group 3,
Condition E consists of incubations amended with 2.4 μM PFOA and
Condition F amended with 2.0 μM PFOS, both of which were also
amended with NH4
+ (2.8 mM) and Fe(III) (10 mM); Group 4 consists of
autoclaved controls for each condition, where the sediment and base
medium were autoclaved before adding the ferrihydrite, PFAS (PFOA or
PFOS), and vitamins.
All vials were vacuumed and flushed with a N2/CO2 (80:20) mixture
to establish anoxic conditions and were sealed with butyl rubber stoppers and aluminum caps. They were then placed on a shaker at 25 ◦C for
90 days. Subsamples of the homogenized slurry were taken every 30
days to analyze for Fe(II), NH4
+, pH, F−, and the targeted PFAAs, as well
as microbial analysis. For the dissolved phase constituents (NH4
+, F−,
dissolved PFOA/PFOS), a supernatant sample was collected and filtered
(0.22 μm) prior to analysis. For the PFOA/PFOS analyses, a representative sample (5 mL) of the slurry suspension was collected under strong
mixing and extracted as described below. Each treatment was performed
in triplicate, and the results were averaged to ensure accuracy and
reliability.
2.3. Chemical analyses
For PFAS analyses, 5 mL of slurry sample were collected from each
sample vial at each time point. An aliquot of liquid phase was collected
after centrifuging at high speed (>15,000 xg > 5 min) to remove
biomass and particulate matter. Then the liquid sample was stabilized in
a methanol solution (50 % methanol). PFAS in the solid phase were
extracted after centrifugation according to the method reported by
Chiavola et al. (2020), for which 10 mL of a solution containing 50 %
methanol and 50 % DI water were added to the centrifuged solids. The
mixture was then sonicated in a water bath for 15 min at 60 ◦C, and then
filtered through 0.22 μm membrane filters for PFAS analysis. Results of
the analyses from the sediment extracts, which includes sorbed and
dissolved PFAS were then expressed as mass of PFAS per volume of
sediment slurry. The total concentration reported is the sum of the dissolved and sorbed concentration expressed as μmol of PFAS/L of sediment slurry. The method described by Chiavola et al., 2020 has been
applied previously to sludge sediments (Huang et al., 2022). The method
is based on ASTM D7968–17 and spike recovery % for all analytes met
the acceptable range between 70-130%.
PFAS analyses were conducted using an LCMS-2050 Single Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer (Shimadzu), in accordance with EPA Method
537.1 (EPA 2018, Shimadzu, 2023). Filtered aliquots (1 μL) were
injected into the LC/MS system, which is equipped with a Shimpak
Velox C18 column (I.D. 2.1 mm, length 50 mm, particle size 2.7 μm)
from Shimadzu. This was done at a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min at 40 ◦C,
enabling the separation of parent compounds (PFOS and PFOA) and
their tentatively identified metabolites among shorter-chain PFAAs. The
gradient for the mobile phase in liquid chromatography was programmed as follows: initially, the mobile phase consisted of 95 % solvent A (5 mM ammonium acetate in water) and 5 % solvent B (HPLCgrade methanol), maintained for 0.5 min. The concentration of solvent B
was then gradually increased to 95 % over 12 min and held steady for 2
min, was subsequently reduced to 10 % in 1 min, and was finally
maintained for an additional 4 min. The mass spectrometer operated in
negative-ion electrospray mode. Quantitative analysis relied on certified
standards for native compounds and isotope-labeled internal standards,
obtained from Wellington Laboratories, Inc., with a purity of 98 % or
higher. LC/MS identification of PFAS, when applicable, depended on
matching retention times with certified standards, detectable signals of
quantifier (QT) and confirmation (CT) MS/MS transitions, and matching
QT/CT ratios (Table S1). Four day 0 subsamples from Sediments #II and
#III, under two different treatments—Condition A (DI water added) and
Condition D (nutrient amendments with 2.8 mM of NH4
+ and 10 mM of
Fe(III))—were sent to SGS AXIS in Canada for analysis using EPA
Method 1633. The results from this analysis were then, as described
below, compared to those obtained through the methanol extraction
method described above.
Anions and cations (NO3
−, NO2
−, F−and NH4
+) were analyzed using a
Dionex™Ion Chromatograph (IC3000) with an AS-18 and CS-16 column, respectively. As an additional confirmation, F−was also analyzed
using a perfectION™combination electrode (Mettler-Toledo, USA). The
Fe(II) concentration was measured spectrophotometrically with ferrozine at 560 nm, and Fe(III) was evaluated as the difference between the
Fe(II) concentrations before and after reduction with excess hydroxylamine hydrochloride, following the method described by Lovley and
Phillips (1987).
2.4. Microbial community analyses
Total DNA and RNA was extracted from each subsample, as
described in the manual of the Fast DNA™spin kit for soil (MP Biomedicals) or RNA PowerSoil® Total RNA Isolation Kit (Bio 101, Qbiogene Inc. CA, USA). The concentration and purity of the isolated total
DNA were checked using a Qubit® 2.0 Fluorometer (Thermo Scientific).
The V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene of bacteria was amplified using
primer-set 515f-806r (Caporaso et al., 2012). All PCR reactions were
carried out with a Phusion® High-Fidelity PCR Master Mix (New England Biolabs), and the PCR products were quantified and purified
before sequencing. Sequencing libraries were generated using TruSeq®
DNA PCR-Free Sample Preparation Kit (Illumina, USA) following the
manufacturer’s recommendations. The library quality was assessed on
the Qubit® 2.0 Fluorometer (Thermo Scientific) and Agilent Bioanalyzer
2100 system. Finally, the library was sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq
Table 1
Physicochemical properties of the sediments from four DoD sites from the Northern Atlantic Coastal Plain.
NH4
+ (mg/kg)
Fe(II)
(mg/kg)
Fe(III) (mg/kg)
pH
moisture %
TOC
(mg/kg)
A6
(106copies/g)
Sediment # I. - Site 1, AFFF impacted
16.34
53.21
77.45
6.11
38.2
179.6
0.51
Sediment # II. - Site 2, AFFF impacted
5.08
67.02
61.19
6.04
41.5
117.8
0.43
Sediment # III. - Site 3, AFFF impacted
5.34
23.10
20.30
6.57
26.3
23.50
0.22
Sediment # IV. - Site 4, AFFF impacted
3.56
19.34
21.45
7.05
33.7
105.3
–
Sediment # V. - Site 2, non-AFFF impacted
6.87
72.32
85.34
6.05
32.5
98.21
0.27
Sediment # VI. - Site 3, non-AFFF impacted
5.41
23.14
33.70
6.03
21.3
86.32
0.33
Note: sediments from site 3 were very sandy, while the other sediments had higher clay contents.
Table 2
Conditions for incubation experiments.
Group
1
A
5 g sediment +30 mL DI water
Group
2
B
5 g sediment +30 mL medium +2.8 mM NH4
+
C
5 g sediment +30 mL medium +10 mM Fe(III)
D
5 g sediment +30 mL medium +2.8 mM NH4
+ and 10 mM Fe(III)
Group
3
E
5 g sediment +30 mL medium +2.8 mM NH4
+ and 10 mM Fe(III) +
2.4 μM PFOA
F
5 g sediment +30 mL medium +2.8 mM NH4
+ and 10 mM Fe(III) +
2.0 μM PFOS
Group
4
G
Autoclaved control for each condition, which was also spiked with
PFOA or PFOS
S. Huang et al.
Science of the Total Environment 955 (2024) 176801 
3

## Page 4

platform at Novogene Co. (Beijing, China) and 250 bp paired-end reads
were generated.
A total of 32,143–73,821 sequences were obtained for the 16S rRNA
gene for each sample. Operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were clustered with a 97 % similarity cut-off using the Uparse software (Uparse
v7.0.100, http://drive5.com/uparse/) (Edgar, 2013), which resulted in
2091–4680 Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs). A representative
sequence for each OTU was screened for further annotation. The taxonomy of each 16S rRNA gene sequence was analyzed with mother
(version v.1.30.1) against the Silva SSUrRNA database using a confidence threshold of 0.8–1. Sequences are available from the NCBI
Sequence Read Archive under BioProject PRJNA1130055.
2.5. qPCR analyses
qPCR analyses were used to quantify total bacterial numbers, Acidimicrobiaceae bacteria, dehalogenase genes, and F−
transporter genes
with specific primers and annealing temperatures (Table S2). The qPCR
analysis of each gene was done on a 96-well StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR
System (Applied Biosystems, CA, USA), following the detailed qPCR
protocol as well as quality control described previously (Huang and
Jaff´e, 2018). The RNA recovery rate for these samples ranges between
67.2 % and 89.4 %. mRNA copy numbers of functional genes were
examined by RT-qPCR using the One Step SYBR PrimeScript RT-PCR Kit
II (TaKaRa, Japan) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The PCR
amplification efficiencies were 92–112 %, and the correlation coefficients (R2) for all assays were > 0.99.
2.6. Statistical analyses
Significance for all tests was accepted at the 0.05 level and was
performed using SPSS v12. Alpha diversity and richness indices
(Observed-species, Chao1, Shannon, Simpson, ACE, Goods-coverage)
were estimated using Qiime (Version 1.7.0). Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) of microbial community composition were performed to
illustrate the similarity of the microbial community in different samples,
and the significance was tested by permutational multivariate analysis
of variance (Adonis) via R.
3. Results
3.1. Sediments characteristics from the AFFF-impacted sites
The chemical properties of the four samples from AFFF-impacted
sediments and the two from non-impacted sediments are shown in
Table 1. All the samples except those from Site 4 were acidic, with Fe(III)
levels ranging from 20 mg/kg to 85 mg/kg. Slurry PFOS concentrations
reported by SGS AXIS using the EPA1633 method were, for Sediments
#II Condition A = 972.4 ng/g, and Condition D = 547.4 ng/g, and for
Sediments #III Condition A = 916.4 ng/g, and Condition D = 1221.0
ng/g. These sediments were also analyzed for PFOS using the methanol
extraction method described above. The results obtained were, for
Sediments #II Condition A = 930.5 ng/g and for Condition D = 764.5
ng/g, and for Sediments #III Condition A, = 1750.4 ng/g and for Condition D = 1407.6 ng/g. Comparing these results shows an average
variation of ~14.1 % in PFOS concentration between methodologies.
For PFOA, SGS AXIS reported concentrations for Sediments #II, Condition A = 5.6 ng/g and Condition D = 26.8 ng/g, and for Sediments
#III, Condition A = 6.7 ng/g and Condition D = 6.5 ng/g. Using the
methanol extraction method, analysis showed PFOA concentrations for
Sediments #II, Condition A = 19.4 ng/g and Condition D 38.3 ng/g, and
for Sediments #III, Condition A = 27.8 ng/g and Condition D = 37.3 ng/
g. These results show an average variation of about 43.9 % in PFOA
concentrations between the two methods, which is larger than that for
PFOS. This larger difference for PFOA might be explained, at least in
part, in that PFOA sorbs less than PFOS and the methanol extraction
method included both the dissolved and sorbed fraction, while the analyses by SGS were done only for the solid fraction and hence does not
include the dissolved amount. Hence, we conclude that, for these specific experiments and sediments, the methanol extraction method yields
PFAS analyses results that are useful for assessing trends in the experiments described below, particularly when performed in triplicate to
account for variability.
The presence and quantity of Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 in these
sediment samples was examined using qPCR with primer set v1–4 (RuizUrigüen et al., 2018; Chester et al., 2023). The PCR products were then
sequenced to ensure successful targeting of Acidimicrobium. As shown in
Table 1, the presence of A6 could be detected (detection limit ~102
cells/g of sediment) in all sediment samples except Sediment #IV, which
was the sample with a pH > 7.
3.2. Sediment incubation results
As discussed above, incubation experiments were carried out in four
groups, as shown in Table 2. Group 1, Condition A, consists of sediment
samples that were incubated with DI water as a control to compare the
response of the system to stimulation with NH4
+ and/or Fe(III). Group 2,
Conditions B, C and D, were set up to determine if A6 and the Feammox
reaction responds to stimulation with an additional electron donor
(NH4
+) and/or acceptor (Fe(III)). Conditions E and F in Group 3 were
incubations supplemented with 2.4 μM PFOA or 2.0 μM PFOS as well as
NH4
+ and Fe(III), to allow for an easier tracking of F−production. Group
4, Condition G, is an autoclaved control with added PFOA and PFOS.
3.2.1. Stimulation of the Feammox process during the sediment incubations
The Feammox reaction (anaerobic NH4
+ oxidation coupled to Fe(III)
reduction) takes place under anoxic conditions. Under anoxic conditions, Fe(III) reduction in environmental samples may also be carried
out by heterotrophic iron reducers. Hence, in these incubations we are
tracking NH4
+ oxidation as an indicator of the Feammox process instead
of iron reduction. Under anoxic conditions there could also be NH4
+
removal via annamox, which requires NO2
−as electron acceptor. Since in
these sediments NO2
−and NO3
−were below detection (0.2 ppm), NH4
+
removal via annamox, if any, would be negligible in these incubations.
Furthermore, the microbial community analyses did not show the
presence of known anammox bacteria such as Ca. Kuenenia, Ca. Jettenia
and Ca. Brocadia.
As shown in Fig. 1, over the 90-day incubation period, most sediment
samples showed significant NH4
+ removal (p < 0.05), although there was
variability for different sediments and incubation conditions. In all the
abiotic controls, the NH4
+ concentration remained stable, suggesting that
in the biotic incubations NH4
+ removal is microbially mediated. Sediments #I and #III showed relatively greater decreases in NH4
+ across all
conditions, including when only deionized water was added (Condition
A), achieving NH4
+ removal ranging from 0.11 to 2.61 mM, or approximately 40.3 % - 98.5 % over 90 days. In the case of Sediment #III,
which contained much less Fe(III) than Sediments #I and #II, there was
a noticeable impact from the addition of Fe(III) (Condition D vs. F).
Sediment #IV (pH > 7, no detectable A6) showed the least NH4
+
removal, ranging from 0 % to 16.1 %, with a maximum of 0.42 mM.
There was no significant difference in NH4
+ removal (p > 0.1) between
the conditions with PFAS addition (Conditions E and F) and the condition without PFAS (Condition D). The highest NH4
+ removal was always
observed in incubations to which Fe(III) was added.
Another key indicator that the Feammox reaction is proceeding, is
the presence and growth of the proper Feammox microorganism, such as
Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6, although the presence of other possible
unknown Feammox microorganisms in these environmental samples
cannot be ruled out. Numbers of Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 for the
different incubations are shown in Fig. S1. Results show that the addition of Fe(III) (with or without addition of NH4
+), Conditions C, D, E, and
F resulted in an increase in A6 numbers over the incubation time.
S. Huang et al.
Science of the Total Environment 955 (2024) 176801 
4

## Page 5

Incubations with Sediments #I and #II showed the most growth of A6
after 90 days of incubation, particularly when the samples were supplemented with NH4
+ and Fe(III), where the A6 numbers increased from
an average of 0.56 × 106 and 0.51 × 106 copies/g to 3.40 × 106 and
3.37 × 106 copies/g, respectively (Fig. S1). For Sediment #V, the increase in A6 numbers was minor in the absence of PFAS but much more
pronounced when the sediments were spiked with PFOA or PFOS.
Whereas the addition of NH4
+ alone did not positively affect A6 numbers
in any of the incubations. It is important to note that while an increase in
A6 with PFAS addition was observed here, incubations with A6 and
PFAS conducted to date have not shown that A6 benefits from PFAS
degradation, when neither NH4
+ nor Fe(III) are limiting. The stimulation
of A6 in the presence of PFOA or PFOS observed here may be due to
other factors present in the complex sediment environment, and further
research is needed to clarify this effect. Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 was
below detection at the beginning and end of the incubations with
Sediment #IV (not shown).
3.2.2. PFAS degradation under different sediment incubation conditions
As shown in Figs. 2 and 3, over the 90-day incubation experiments,
when Fe(III) was added to the sediments, a decrease in PFOA and PFOS
could be observed in the incubations of Sediment #I, #II, and #III,
which are the AFFF-impacted sediments where A6 was detected and
could be stimulated. The incubations with the more alkaline Sediment
#IV did not show a statistically significant decrease (p > 0.1) in PFOA or
PFOS concentrations and A6 was not detected in these incubations. For
Sediment #I, Condition A, where no additional nutrients were added to
stimulate the Feammox reaction, a significant PFOA decrease (p < 0.05)
was observed during that incubation. Sediment #I, had the highest NH4
+
concentration of the sediments studied (by a factor of ~3), and among
the higher Fe(III) concentrations, which may be contributing to Feammox activity without biostimulation, and hence may explain this
decrease in PFOA, although we do not see a commensurate increase in
F−, nor a decrease in PFOS. The non-impacted Sediments #V and #VI,
with 2.4 μM PFOA and 2.0 μM PFOS added, exhibited modest decreases
in PFAA concentrations, while the AFFF-impacted Sediments #II and
Fig. 1. Concentrations of NH4
+ during incubation with different sediment slurries. (A = DI; B = medium + NH4
+; C = medium + Fe(III); D = medium + NH4
+ + Fe(III);
E = medium + NH4
+ + Fe(III) + 2.4 μM PFOA; F = medium + NH4
+ + Fe(III) + 2.0 μM PFOS; G = autoclaved control spiked with 2.4 μM PFOA (not shown is the
autoclaved control spiked with 2.0 μM PFOS). Sediments V and VI are non-PFAS impacted sediments near to Sediments II and III, respectively).
S. Huang et al.
Science of the Total Environment 955 (2024) 176801 
5

## Page 6

#III showed significantly higher (p < 0.05) removal. Notably, while the
average fraction of PFOA degraded across these sediments remained
relatively constant, the fraction of PFOS degraded increased when the
sediments were amended with this PFAA. The reason for this difference
is attributed to the difference in sorption of these two components in
these slurry experiments. While dissolved-phase PFOS in the unamended
sediments were at or below detection, once the sediments were amended
with 2.0 μM PFOS, about 50 % of the mass remained in solution. Hence,
a larger fraction of PFOS is degraded as its total mass, and therefore
dissolved fraction, increased. In contrast, the difference between
extracted (total) and dissolved PFOA mass is minor, indicating little
sorption and less effect of the concentration on the total fraction
degraded.
Fluoride (F−) production during these incubations exhibited similar
trends (Fig. S2). A substantial increase in F−was observed in samples
spiked with 2.4 μM PFOA or 2.0 μM PFOS vs. that of the non-spiked
samples, suggesting that the microorganisms present in these biostimulated sediments have the capability to defluorinate PFOA and
PFOS. There was only a minor increase in F−
in the incubations of
Sediment #IV in response to spiking these samples with PFOA or PFOS,
which also did not show a statistically significant (p > 0.1) decrease in
the concentration of these constituents during the incubations, although
results indicate some decrease in the PFOA concentration that would be
consistent with the small observed increase in F−. There was no increase
in F−in the incubations with autoclaved sediment samples. A fluorine
mass balance for the samples spiked with 2.4 μM PFOA or 2.0 μM PFOS
(Conditions E and F, after correcting for the amount produced under
Condition D), accounts for 69.5 % to 82.8 % of the fluorine in the system,
assuming complete defluorination of PFOA and PFOS (shorter carbon
chain PFAAs are likely to have been produced but were not quantified
Fig. 2. Concentrations of PFOA during incubation with different sediment slurries. (A = DI; B = medium + NH4
+; C = medium + Fe(III); D = medium + NH4
+ + Fe
(III); E = medium + NH4
+ + Fe(III) + 2.4 μM PFOA; F = medium + NH4
+ + Fe(III) + 2.0 μM PFOS; G = autoclaved control, spiked with 2.4 μM PFOA. Sediments V and
VI are non-PFAS impacted sediments near to sediments II and III, respectively.
S. Huang et al.
Science of the Total Environment 955 (2024) 176801 
6

## Page 7

and could account, at least in part, for some of the missing fluorine).
3.3. Changes in the microbial community in the sediments during the
incubations
Microbial analyses and community analyses were conducted to
determine if: (i) Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 is present in these sediments, and whether stimulation with NH4
+ and Fe(III) leads to its
growth, and (ii) the presence of PFAS may impact the microbial community structure, before and after the incubations. Analysis of the microbial
community structure
were
conducted
on
incubations
of
Sediments #I, #II, #III, #V, and #VI, with and without the addition of
PFOA or PFOS.
In all incubations without the addition of PFOA/PFOS, except for
Sediment #IV, the proportion of A6 remained between 0.3 % and 1 %
(Table S5), showing little change before and after the incubations. In
incubations with Sediments #I and #II, when supplemented with NH4
+
and Fe(III), the A6 numbers increased during the incubation period by
approximately 5.7 times and 7.0 times, respectively (Fig. S1); however,
the overall proportion of A6 did not increase substantially. After 90 days
of incubation, the proportion of A6 in sediments with PFAS addition was
higher compared to that in sediments without PFAS addition (Fig. S3,
Table S5).
Comparing the alpha-diversity of the microbial communities between the AFFF-impacted sediments (Sediment #I, #II, and #III) and
the non-AFFF-impacted sediments (Sediment #V and #VI), reveals that
the alpha-diversity (Chao1 and Shannon index) is relatively higher in
the non-impacted sediments (Table S4). Similarly, after 90 days of incubation, there was a slight decrease in the alpha-diversity of the microbial communities of Sediment #I and #II augmented with PFAS
compared to their initial state (day 0) and the samples incubated
without PFAS addition. In contrast, the addition of PFAS to AFFFimpacted sediments decreased the microbial diversity over time,
whereas the addition of PFAS to the non-AFFF-impacted sediments
(Sediments #V and #VI) resulted in minimal changes in the alphadiversity. Notably, after 90 days of incubation with PFOA, Sediment
Fig. 3. Concentrations of PFOS during incubation with different sediment slurries. (A = DI; B = medium + NH4
+; C = medium + Fe(III); D = medium + NH4
+ + Fe
(III); E = medium + NH4
+ + Fe(III) + 2.4 μM PFOA; F = medium + NH4
+ + Fe(III) + 2.0 μM PFOS; G = autoclaved control, spiked with 2.0 μM PFOS. Sediments V and
VI are non-PFAS impacted sediments near to sediments II and III, respectively.
S. Huang et al.
Science of the Total Environment 955 (2024) 176801 
7

## Page 8

#V showed a slight increase in both the Chao1 and Shannon indices
(Table S4).
The microbial community composition exhibits distinct differences
between AFFF-impacted sediments (Sediment #I, #II, and #III), which
have been exposed to long-term PFAS contamination, and the nonimpacted sediments (Sediment #V and #VI) (Fig. 4, and S4). Notably,
the microbial compositions of the AFFF-impacted sediments from
different locations were more similar to each other than the AFFFimpacted vs. non-impacted sediments at the same location (Fig. 4 and
S4). The PCoA analyses reveal significant variations in microbial communities during incubations with different treatments. There are
significantly different (p < 0.05) in the microbial communities between
samples with PFAS amended and those without PFAS amendment.
Furthermore, in AFFF-impacted sediments (Sediments #I, #II, and #III),
the microbial community composition on day 90 showed greater
divergence compared to day 0 and day 30 (Fig. 5). Burkholderiaceae
emerged as the most abundant family across all sediment samples, with
Paraburkholderia and Cupriavidus being significantly more prevalent in
AFFF-impacted sediments. Furthermore, families such as Chthoniobacteraceae, Sphingomonadaceae, Alicyclobacillaceae, and Ktedonobacteraceae were also more abundant in AFFF-impacted samples, whereas
Nitrosomonadaceae, Comamonadaceae, and Anaeromyxobacteraceae were
more prevalent in the non-impacted sediments (Fig. 3). The organisms
mentioned above, that were higher in the AFFF-impacted sediments,
increased further in the incubations with sediments augmented with
PFOA or PFOS (Fig. S3).
3.4. Distribution and expression of functional genes related to PFAS level
in sediments
Functional gene quantification was performed to assess whether the
distribution and activity of specific functional genes correlates with
PFAS contamination in the soil and/or the biostimulation of these sediments. The genes of interest that are potentially related to PFAS and
their possible degradation include dehalogenase genes and F−
ion
transporter genes. Dehalogenases are microbial enzymes that catalyze
the cleavage of a carbon-halogen bonds in halogenated organic compounds, playing a crucial role in the degradation and dehalogenation of
organic pollutants in the environment, especially under anaerobic conditions. Previous work has shown that the genome of Acidimicrobium sp.
strain A6 contains dehalogenase genes, including a putative reductive
dehalogenase, rdhA, and that in incubations with this bacterium in the
presence of different PFAS a strong correlation between F−produced
and the expression of the rdhA gene is observed (Jaff´e et al., 2021,
2024). Furthermore, experiments where this gene was knocked out did
not result in PFAS defluorination by Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6 (Jaff´e
et al., 2021, 2024). Based on these results, it was postulated that the
rdhA gene in Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6, or more accurately, its related
enzyme, plays a crucial role in the defluorination of some PFAS, such as
PFOA and PFOS. Hence, the rdhA gene number and its expression were
tracked during the incubation experiments described in these biostimulation experiments. In addition to this rdhA gene, it is likely that
many other dehalogenase genes are present in these sediment samples
and may play a role in the degradation of specific PFAS. Based on
existing research on dehalogenase genes commonly found in environmental soil samples, we used both broad-range and A6-specific primers
(as detailed in Table S2) to screen, detect, and quantify various dehalogenase genes using qPCR in the sediment samples collected for this
study. Genes showing significant presence include 2-haloacid dehalogenase, haloalkane dehalogenase, haloacetate dehalogenase, and the
conserved rdhA in Dehalococcoides. These genes were prioritized for
detailed functional studies due to their significant presence in the AFFFimpacted sediments. Since F−is toxic to microorganisms, in environments that have high levels of dissolved F−, or when bacteria defluorinate fluorinated organics, including PFAS, bacteria employ a specialized
channel protein known as the putative F−ion transporter crcB to cope
with the F−
toxicity (Wackett, 2021, 2024). Primers targeting crcB
genes, based on the genome of A6, have been designed and evaluated
using Primer-BLAST (Jaff´e et al., 2024).
Using qPCR analysis, these genes were detected and quantified in
Fig. 4. Microbial community abundances at the family level of AFFF-impacted sediments (Sediment #I, Sediment #II and Sediment #III) and non-impacted sediments (Sediment #V and Sediment #VI). Only families with a relative abundance >0.5 % in at least 10 % of samples are represented. Detailed information at the
genus level for the Burkholderiaceae family is provided. Specific information for the top 100 families is shown in Table S4.
S. Huang et al.
Science of the Total Environment 955 (2024) 176801 
8

## Page 9

AFFF-impacted sediments (Sediment #I, #II and #III) and non-impacted
sediments (Sediment #V and #VI). The results show that the abundance
of total dehalogenase genes (including 2-haloacid dehalogenase, haloalkane dehalogenase, haloacetate dehalogenase, reductive dehalogenase) was significantly higher in the AFFF-impacted sediments as
compared to the non-impacted sediment samples (Fig. 6). Specifically,
when targeting the reductive dehalogenase (rdhA) genes (including
conserved rdhA in Dehalococcoides and Acidimicrobiaceae rdhA genes),
the number of these genes in AFFF-contaminated samples were about
two orders of magnitude higher than in the non-contaminated sediments
(Fig. 6). Interestingly, Sediment #I, which harbored the highest abundance of Acidimicrobiaceae rdhA genes (Fig. 6), also demonstrated the
greatest PFOA and PFOS removal during incubations following stimulation and the addition of these PFAAs (Figs. 2 and 3). The abundance of
the F−ion transporter crcB showed no significant difference between
AFFF-impacted sediments (Sediment #II and #III) and non-impacted
sediment samples (Sediment #V and #VI) (Fig. 6).
To determine the impact of higher PFAS concentrations on the
abundance of these genes, analyses were also performed on incubations
with AFFF-impacted sediments (Sediment #II and #III) and nonimpacted sediment samples (Sediment #V and #VI) amended with
PFOA and PFOS. Quantification of RNA using RT-qPCR revealed that the
expression of selected dehalogenase genes (including 2-haloacid dehalogenase, conserved rdhA, and Acidimicrobiaceae rdhA genes) increased
significantly (p < 0.05) during incubations with the addition of PFOA
and PFOS, as compared to no PFAS addition in both AFFF-impacted and
non-impacted sediments. The expression of crcB was significantly higher
(p < 0.05) in PFAS-amended samples as compared to the non-amended
samples (Fig. S5). The higher expression of crcB might be attributed to
the higher F−
levels present in these incubations because of the
defluorination of these PFAS.
4. Discussion
4.1. Stimulation of the A6/Feammox reaction and PFAS degradation in
AFFF impacted sediment incubations
Anaerobic batch incubations were conducted with iron-rich sediments from different AFFF-impacted sediments. Results show that
Sediment #I, #II, and #III, which have pH values around 6–6.5, foster
an environment suitable for the Feammox reaction (Fig. 1). Incubations
of these sediment samples demonstrated that A6 growth can be stimulated with added Fe(III), but the most significant growth occurs when
both Fe(III) and NH4
+ are supplied (Fig. S1). The impact of added Fe(III)
is greater for sediments with lower background Fe(III) levels, such as
Sediment #III, where little to no NH4
+ oxidation occurs unless Fe(III) is
added. In contrast, the addition of Fe(III) has a negligible effect on NH4
+
oxidation in Sediment #I, which has the highest Fe(III) levels. The effect
of Fe(III) addition on NH4
+oxidation in Sediment #IV was minor due to
the higher pH, which is not conducive to the growth of A6 and the
Feammox process. In incubations with active Feammox reactions and A6
growth, particularly those stimulated via the addition of Fe(III) and
NH4
+, there was enhanced degradation of PFAS. In these incubations, the
degradation of PFOS was higher than that of PFOA. After 90 days of
incubation with PFAS amended, in Sediments #I, #II, and #III, there
was an 84.6 % to 93.7 % decrease of PFOS, while the decrease of PFOA
was 43.7 % to 87.9 % (Figs. 2 and 3, Fig. S6, shows the same results
comparing changes in the different constituents between sediments and
treatments).
When A6 was stimulated in these sediments and amended with
PFOA/PFOS, a significantly greater decrease in the concentration of
these PFAS was observed in the AFFF-impacted sediments (Sediments
#I, #II, and #III) as compared to the non-impacted sediments (Sediments #V, and #VI), indicating that the microbial community of the
AFFF-impacted sediments had experienced an acclimation/adaptation
to PFAS. This might also explain why the degradation of PFOS was more
Fig. 5. Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) ordination based on Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrix showing significantly different (p < 0.05) microbial composition for
Sediment #I, II and III on (a) day 0 and day 30, (b) day 90, as well as for Sediment #V and VI on (c) day 0 and day 90. Each point represents a sediment sample, colorcoded according to different treatments applied, A. no PFAS addition; B. PFOA or PFOS.
S. Huang et al.
Science of the Total Environment 955 (2024) 176801 
9

## Page 10

active in the AFFF-impacted sediments vs. that of PFOA, since PFOS was
the most prevalent PFAA.
These incubation experimental results indicate that in iron-rich,
acidic, AFFF-impacted sediments where A6 is present, some defluorination of perfluoroalkyl substances such as PFOA and PFOS can be
achieved through the stimulation of the Feammox reaction. Although
based on previous incubation results, the defluorination of PFOA/PFOS
might be attributed to the activity of A6, the potential presence of other
PFAS-degrading microbes can’t be ruled out.
4.2. Effects of PFAS and Feammox stimulation on the microbial
community structure
Significant differences were observed in the microbial communities
between AFFF-impacted and non-impacted sediments (Fig. 4 and S4). As
the incubations progressed under different treatments, the divergence in
community structure between PFAS-amended and non-amended sediments became more substantial (Fig. 5). Higher proportions of the
genera Paraburkholderia and Sphingomonas were observed in AFFFimpacted sediments, and these genera being further enriched in the
PFAS-amended incubations (Fig. S3). During incubation with PFAS, the
relative abundance of Paraburkholderia increased from 11 % to 24 %
after 30 days, but decreased to 2 % in the non-PFAS samples, and
dropped in all samples by day 90 (Fig. S3). The genome of Paraburkholderia includes genes for (S)-2-haloacid dehalogenase, an enzyme
recently identified as involved in PFOA degradation (Harris et al., 2022).
Similarly, Sphingomonas showed higher proportions in PFAS-amended
samples at day 30 and day 90 compared to non-PFAS incubations as
well as the initial samples (Fig. S3). Recent studies indicate that Sphingomonas are more prevalent in PFOS-contaminated soil (Qiao et al.,
2018; Yin et al., 2023) and are potential degraders of 8:2 FTOH, based
on their increased abundance after exposure to 8:2 FTOH (Dong et al.,
Fig. 6. qPCR results of selected dehalogenase genes and fluoride transporter genes from environmental samples. All measurements are shown in units DNA copy per
gram sediments (Sediment # I, II and # III are AFFF-impacted sediments, Sediment # V and # VI are non-impacted sediments).
S. Huang et al.
Science of the Total Environment 955 (2024) 176801 
10

## Page 11

2023). After 90 days of incubation, sulfate-reducing bacteria such as
Desulfovirga and Desulfurispora, along with sulfur/sulfide-oxidizing
bacteria Sphingomonas, exhibited significant growth in incubations
augmented with PFOS. Desulfovirga and Desulfurispora may potentially
be involved in PFOS degradation (Lorah et al., 2024), and/or their
growth may be stimulated by the production of sulfate resulting from the
degradation of PFOS. The presence of these organisms has been
observed in A6 enrichment cultures (Huang and Jaff´e, 2019; Ruiz-Urigüen et al., 2021) to which only PFOA or PFOS were added, and it was
hypothesized that as A6 partially defluorinates these PFAA’s, these organisms can then degrade the partially defluorinated compounds
further.
4.3. Quantification and expression of selected functional genes during the
biostimulation experiments
The microbial response to PFAA contamination involves complex
mechanisms, which may be influenced by the presence or absence of
various functional genes. Although much remains unknown, two key
steps are essential for the degradation of PFAAs (Wackett, 2021). First,
microbes must possess enzymes capable of catalyzing the C–F bond
cleavage. Since all incubations of this study were conducted under
anaerobic conditions, dehalogenase genes were the primary focus for
catalyzing the C–F bond cleavage. Previous studies have shown a strong
correlation between reductive dehalogenase gene expression and fluoride production in Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 incubations with PFOA,
PFOS, and PFHxS (Jaff´e et al., 2021). Consistent with these findings, this
study revealed that dehalogenase genes are more prevalent in AFFFimpacted sediments and highly expressed in PFAS-amended incubations (Fig. 6 and Fig. S5). Results presented in Fig. 6 show that the
largest difference between the presence of the genes tracked here in the
AFFF-impacted vs. the non-impacted sediments is for the conserved rdhA
and the Acidimicrobeaceae rdhA. Of these two, the Acidimicrobeaceae
rdhA copy numbers in the initial AFFF-impacted sediments, tracks
closest to the amount of PFOA/PFOS removed during biostimulation
(Fig. S5). This further suggests that these enzymes may facilitate the
removal of fluorine atoms from the carbon backbone of PFAS, leading to
their breakdown and subsequent biodegradation/biotransformation.
Secondly, microbes must protect themselves against fluoride toxicity,
potentially through fluoride-proton antiporters. The crcB gene, a fluoride transcription regulator, is critical for microbial survival in PFAScontaminated
environments
(Stockbridge
and
Wackett,
2024).
Although the distribution of crcB genes did not show significant differences between AFFF-impacted and non-impacted sediments (Fig. 6),
microbes lacking the crcB gene decreased significantly in number in
incubations amended with PFAS, likely due to fluoride toxicity. Genera
such as Pseudolabrys, Gemmatimonadaceae, Candidatus Omnitrophus,
Tumebacillus, Candidatus Nitrosotalea, Dehalococcoidia, and Gaiellales
showed substantial reductions in PFAS-amended incubations compared
to non-amended incubations (Fig. 4 and Fig. S3). A comprehensive
investigation was conducted using the NCBI and KEGG databases to
examine the presence of the crcB gene in the specified bacterial genera.
Upon searching the genomic data available in these databases, no annotated crcB genes were found within these genera, indicating that these
bacteria do not possess known crcB genes. In the sediment incubations
described above, the expression of the Acidmicrobiacease crcB gene was
significantly higher in PFAS-amended sediments (Fig.S5), where the
defluorination of PFOA/PFOS resulted in a significant increase in the
dissolved F−concentration.
These findings highlight the potential to use selected functional
genes, such as dehalogenase genes and perhaps fluoride transcription
regulator genes, as possible indicators for PFAS degradation. Monitoring
the presence and expression of these genes could provide valuable insights into the microbial mechanisms driving PFAS biotransformation
and inform bioremediation strategies.
5. Conclusions
Results of the incubations conducted here indicate that Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 is present at some acidic, iron rich sites, where it
can be stimulated via the addition of Fe(III) and NH4
+, which results in an
enhanced PFAS defluorination. Interestingly, when Acidimicrobium sp.
Strain A6 was stimulated in these sediments, and they were amended
with PFOA/PFOS, significantly more decrease in the concentration of
these PFAS, and most importantly a corresponding increase in F−was
observed, which provided strong evidence that the added PFAS were
being defluorinated, especially considering that no significant differences in the PFOA/PFOS or F−concentration over the incubation period
were detected in any of the autoclaved incubations.
Even though there is some noise in the analyses of PFOA/PFOS and
F−
in the sediments without the addition of PFOA/PFOS, results do
indicate that there is little effect from the addition of just NH4
+ on PFOA/
PFOS degradation and F−production, but once either Fe(III) or Fe(III)
and NH4
+ are added, there is an overall measurable effect on PFOA/PFOS
removal and F−
production, indicating that Fe(III) is limiting their
degradation process.
Although the experiments did not focus on the specific role of
Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 in the defluorination of these PFAAs, results
presented here indicate that in iron-rich, acidic, AFFF-impacted sediments, where this bacterium is present, defluorination of perfluoroalkyl
substances such as PFOA and PFOS may be enhanced via its stimulation
with an Fe(III) source and NH4
+. The overall conclusion of these findings
is that there might be sites with the proper biogeochemical characteristics, where biostimulation might result in the degradation of PFAAs,
opening potential avenues for novel bioremediation schemes for PFAS
contaminated soils.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.176801.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Shan Huang: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation.
Chiara Smorada: Writing – original draft, Investigation. Charles E.
Schaefer: Methodology, Writing – review & editing. Peter R. Jaff´e:
Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests:
Peter Jaffe reports financial support was provided by US Department
of
Defense.
Peter
Jaffe
has
patent
#“Biodegradation
of
Fluorochemicals,” U.S. Provisional Application No. 62/792,971, January 16,
2019, (with S. Huang). pending to Princeton University. If there are
other authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
Funding for this research was provided by DoD, SERDP Project
Number: ER20-1219.
The authors acknowledge Qiuen Yu for her assistance with the
graphical abstract. Primer design of the crcB gene used here was done by
Dr. Mansha Seth Pasricha.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
S. Huang et al.
Science of the Total Environment 955 (2024) 176801 
11

## Page 12

References
Ahmed, M., Anwar, R., Deng, D., Garner, E., Lin, L.-S., 2021. Functional
Interrelationships of Microorganisms in Iron-Based Anaerobic Wastewater
Treatment. Microorganisms 9, 1039. https://doi.org/10.3390/
microorganisms9051039.
Caporaso, J.G., Lauber, C.L., Walters, W.A., Berg-Lyons, D., Huntley, J., Fierer, N.,
Owens, S.M., Betley, J., Fraser, L., Bauer, M., Gormley, N., Gilbert, J.A., Smith, G.,
Knight, R., 2012. Ultra-high-throughput microbial community analysis on the
Illumina HiSeq and MiSeq platforms. ISME J. 6, 1621–1624. https://doi.org/
10.1038/ismej.2012.8.
Cerda, ´A., Gonz´alez, M., Rodríguez, C., Serrano, J., Leiva, E., 2023. Feammox Bacterial
Biofilms as an Alternative Biological Process for the Removal of Nitrogen from
Agricultural Wastewater. Agriculture 13, 728. https://doi.org/10.3390/
agriculture13030728.
Chester, A.L.H., Gallagher, N., Huang, S., Jaff´e, P.R., Novak, P.J., 2023. Stormwater
applications of zeolite-coated biofilm carriers for ammonium removal with possible
applications to PFAS biotransformation. Environ. Sci. Water Res. Technol. 9,
3227–3242. https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ew00101f.
Chiavola, A., Marcantonio, C.D., Boni, M.R., Biagioli, S., Frugis, A., Cecchini, G., 2020.
Experimental investigation on the perfluorooctanoic and perfluorooctane sulfonic
acids fate and behaviour in the activated sludge reactor. Process. Saf. Environ. Prot.
134, 406–415. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2019.11.003.
Denver, J.M., Ator, S.W., Fischer, J.M., Harned, D.C., Schubert, C., Szabo, Z., 2014.
Water Quality in the Northern Atlantic Coastal Plain Surficial Aquifer System,
Delaware, Maryland, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, and Virginia,
1988–2009. USGS Circular 1353. https://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/1353/.
Ding, B., Zhang, H., Luo, W., Sun, S., Cheng, F., Li, Z., 2021. Nitrogen loss through
denitrification, anammox and Feammox in a paddy soil. Sci. Total Environ. 773,
145601. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.145601.
Dong, S., Yan, P.-F., Liu, C., Manz, K.E., Mezzari, M.P., Abriola, L.M., Pennell, K.D.,
C´apiro, N.L., 2023. Assessing aerobic biotransformation of 8:2 fluorotelomer alcohol
in aqueous film-forming foam (AFFF)-impacted soils: Pathways and microbial
community dynamics. J. Hazard. Mater. 446, 130629. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2022.130629.
Edgar, R., 2013. UPARSE: highly accurate OTU sequences from microbial amplicon
reads. Nat. Methods 10 (10), 996–998.
Harris, J.D., Coon, C.M., Doherty, M.E., McHugh, E.A., Warner, M.C., Walters, C.L.,
Orahood, O.M., Loesch, A.E., Hatfield, D.C., Sitko, J.C., Almand, E.A., Steel, J.J.,
2022. Engineering and characterization of dehalogenase enzymes from Delftia
acidovorans in bioremediation of perfluorinated compounds. Synth. Syste.
Biotechnol. 7, 671–676. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2022.02.005.
Huang, S., Jaff´e, P.R., 2015. Characterization of incubation experiments and
development of an enrichment culture capable of ammonium oxidation under ironreducing conditions. Biogeosciences 12, 769–779. https://doi.org/10.5194/bg-12769-2015.
Huang, S., Jaff´e, P.R., 2018. Isolation and characterization of an ammonium-oxidizing
iron reducer: Acidimicrobiaceae sp. A6. PLoS One 13, e0194007. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0194007.
Huang, S., Jaff´e, P.R., 2019. Defluorination of Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA) and
Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS) by Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 53, 11410–11419. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.9b04047.
Huang, S., Chen, C., Peng, X., Jaff´e, P.R., 2016. Environmental factors affecting the
presence of Acidimicrobiaceae and ammonium removal under iron-reducing
conditions in soil environments. Soil Biol. Biochem. 98, 148–158. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.soilbio.2016.04.012.
Huang, S., Sima, M., Long, Y., Messenger, C., Jaff´e, P.R., 2022. Anaerobic degradation of
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in biosolids by Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6.
J. Hazard. Mater. 424, 127699. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.127699.
Jaff´e, P.R., Huang, S., Sima, M., Ross, I., Liu, J., 2021. Biotransformation and Potential
Mineralization of PFOS, PFHxS, and PFOA by Acidimicrobiaceae sp. A6 under Iron
Reducing Conditions. SERDP Project ER20-1219. https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs
/AD1159152.pdf.
Jaff´e, P.R., Huang, S., Park, J., Ruiz-Urigüen, M., Shuai, W., Sima, M., 2024.
Defluorination of PFAS by Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6 and potential applications for
remediation. Methods Enzymol. 696, 287–320. https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.
mie.2024.01.013.
LaFond, J.A., Hatzinger, P.B., Guelfo, J.L., Millerick, K., Jackson, W.A., 2023. Bacterial
transformation of per- and poly-fluoroalkyl substances: a review for the field of
bioremediation. Environ. Sci. Adv. 2, 1019–1041.
Lorah, M.M., He, K., Blaney, L., Akob, D.M., Harris, C., Tokranov, A., Hopkins, Z.,
Shedd, B.P., 2024. Anaerobic biodegradation of perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS)
and microbial community composition in soil amended with a dechlorinating culture
and chlorinated solvents. Sci. Total Environ. 932, 172996. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.scitotenv.2024.172996.
Lovley, D.R., Phillips, E.J., 1987. Rapid assay for microbially reducible ferric iron in
aquatic sediments. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 53, 1536–1540. https://doi.org/
10.1128/aem.53.7.1536-1540.1987.
Ma, D., Wang, J., Fang, J., Jiang, Y., Yue, Z., 2024. Asynchronous characteristics of
Feammox and iron reduction from paddy soils in Southern China. Environ. Res. 252,
118843. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2024.118843.
Park, J., Huang, S., Koel, B.E., Jaff´e, P.R., 2023. Enhanced Feammox activity and
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) degradation by Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 using
PAA-coated ferrihydrite as an electron acceptor. J. Hazard. Mater. 459, 132039.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2023.132039.
Qiao, W., Xie, Z., Zhang, Y., Liu, X., Xie, S., Huang, J., Yu, L., 2018. Perfluoroalkyl
substances (PFASs) influence the structure and function of soil bacterial community:
Greenhouse experiment. Sci. Total Environ. 642, 1118–1126. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.06.113.
Reinikainen, J., Perkola, N., ¨Ayst¨o, L., Sorvari, J., 2022. The occurrence, distribution,
and risks of PFAS at AFFF-impacted sites in Finland. Sci. Total Environ. 829, 154237.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.154237.
Ruiz-Urigüen, M., Shuai, W., Jaff´e, P.R., 2018. Electrode Colonization by the Feammox
Bacterium Acidimicrobiaceae sp. Strain A6. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 84, e0202918. https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.02029-18.
Ruiz-Urigüen, M., Shuai, W., Huang, S., Jaff´e, P.R., 2021. Biodegradation of PFOA in
microbial electrolysis cells by Acidimicrobiaceae sp. strain A6. Chemosphere 292,
133506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2021.133506.
Sherman, A.E., Huang, S., Jaff´e, P.R., 2023. Impacts of storm disturbance and the role of
the Feammox process in high nutrient riparian sediments. Biogeochemistry 165,
113–128. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10533-023-01062-7.
Shimadzu, 2023. Analysis of 28 Common PFAS Compounds using Compact Single
Quadrupole LCMS-2050. Application News SSI-LCMS-14. https://www.ssi.shimadzu
.com/sites/ssi.shimadzu.com/files/pim/pim_document_file/ssi/applications/appli
cation_note/22420/SSI-LCMS-149.pdf.
Sima, M.W., Huang, S., Jaff´e, P.R., 2023. Modeling the kinetics of perfluorooctanoic and
perfluorooctane sulfonic acid biodegradation by Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6
during the feammox process. J. Hazard. Mater. 448, 130903. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jhazmat.2023.130903.
Smorada, C.M., Sima, M.W., Jaff´e, P.R., 2024. Bacterial Degradation of Perfluoroalkyl
Acids. Current Opinions in Biotechnology. (in press).
Stockbridge, R.B., Wackett, L.P., 2024. The link between ancient microbial fluoride
resistance mechanisms and bioengineering organofluorine degradation or synthesis.
Nat. Commun. 15, 4593. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49018-1.
Tang, Z., Vogel, T.M., Wang, Q., Wei, C., Ali, M., Song, X., 2024. Microbial defluorination
of TFA, PFOA, and HFPO-DA by a native microbial consortium under anoxic
conditions. J. Hazard. Mater. 465, 133217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2023.133217.
US EPA, 2018 (accessed 2024-06-25). https://www.epa.gov/pfas/basic-information-pfas
.
US EPA, 2024. Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS). https://www.epa.gov/sdwa
/and-polyfluoroalkyl-substances-pfas (accessed 2024-06-25).
Wackett, L.P., 2021. Why is the biodegradation of polyfluorinated compounds so rare?
mSphere 6. https://doi.org/10.1128/msphere.00721-21 e00721–21.
Wackett, L.P., 2024. Evolutionary obstacles and not C–F bond strength make PFAS
persistent. Microb. Biotechnol. 17, e14463. https://doi.org/10.1111/17517915.14463.
Yang, W.H., Weber, K.A., Silver, W.L., 2012. Nitrogen loss from soil through anaerobic
ammonium oxidation coupled to iron reduction. Nat. Geosci. 5, 538–541. https://
doi.org/10.1038/ngeo1530.
Yi, B., Wang, H., Zhang, Q., Jin, H., Abbas, T., Li, Y., Liu, Y., Di, H., 2019. Alteration of
gaseous nitrogen losses via anaerobic ammonium oxidation coupled with ferric
reduction from paddy soils in Southern China. Sci. Total Environ. 652, 1139–1147.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.10.195.
Yin, L., Wang, Xiaolong, Xu, H., Yin, B., Wang, Xingshuo, Zhang, Y., Li, X., Luo, Y.,
Chen, Z., 2023. Unrecognized risk of perfluorooctane sulfonate in promoting
conjugative transfers of bacterial antibiotic resistance genes. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 89, e00533-23. https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.00533-23.
Zhu, T., Lai, W., Zhang, Y.-B., Liu, Y., 2022. Feammox process driven anaerobic
ammonium removal of wastewater treatment under supplementing Fe(III)
compounds. Sci. Total Environ. 804, 149965. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2021.149965.
S. Huang et al.
Science of the Total Environment 955 (2024) 176801 
12

