# 1-s2.0-S0045653514001635-main

**Source PDF**: 1-s2.0-S0045653514001635-main.pdf

---

## Page 1

Technical Note
Biodegradation of perﬂuorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) as an emerging
contaminant
Bum Gun Kwon a,b,⇑, Hye-Jung Lim a, Suk-Hyun Na a, Bong-In Choi a, Dong-Soo Shin c, Seon-Yong Chung a,⇑
a Department of Environment and Energy Engineering, College of Engineering, Chonnam National University, 77 Yongbong-ro, Buk-gu, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea
b Gyeongnam Department of Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, Korea Institute of Toxicology (KIT), 17 Jeigok-gil, Munsan-eup, Jinju, Gyeongsangnam-do 660-844,
Republic of Korea
c Department of Chemistry, Changwon National University, 20 Changwondaehak-ro, Uichang-gu, Changwon-si, GN 641-773, Republic of Korea
h i g h l i g h t s
 We have identiﬁed the aerobic microorganism for the decomposition of PFOS.
 Ca. 67% of a 600 mg L1 conc. of PFOS was biodegraded by Pseudomonas aeruginosa after 12 h.
 Our result is considered a major advancement in sustainable PFOS treatment.
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 7 August 2013
Received in revised form 31 December 2013
Accepted 22 January 2014
Available online 18 February 2014
Keywords:
Perﬂuorooctanesulfonate
PFOS
Persistence
Bioaccumulation
Biodegradation
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
a b s t r a c t
Perﬂuorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) is a compound of global concern because of its persistence and bioaccumulation in the environment. Nevertheless, little is known of the potential for PFOS biodegradation, even
though the importance of characterizing the function and activity of microbial populations detected in
the environment has been discussed. This study focused on the biodegradation of PFOS by a speciﬁc
microorganism. Through this study, we have identiﬁed the aerobic microorganism for the speciﬁc decomposition of PFOS from wastewater treatment sludge, as a well-known sink for environmental PFOS. This
species was Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain HJ4 with a 99% similarity, a mesophilic rod type bacteria
(30–37 C). A pH range of 7–9 was determined to be optimal for the growth of strain HJ4. In this study
approximately 67% over a range of concentrations (1400–1800 lg L1) for PFOS was biologically
decomposed by P. aeruginosa after 48 h incubation. This result is reported here for the ﬁrst time, which
strongly pertains to the efﬁcient biodegradation of PFOS. Therefore, our study is considered a major
advancement in sustainable PFOS treatment.
 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The
ubiquitous
presence
of
anthropogenic
perﬂuorinated
compounds (PFCs) in the environment has been recognized as an
important global environmental issue (Key et al., 1997; Liou
et al., 2010; Clarke and Smith, 2011; Llorca et al., 2012; Naile
et al., 2013; Zareitalabad et al., 2013). Amongst PFCs, perﬂuorooctanesulfonate (PFOS), having approximately 41 yr half-life in water
(US EPA, 2012), has ignited widespread interest as a stable yet toxic
product
arising
from
the
biodegradation,
photooxidation,
photolysis, and hydrolysis of PFCs (Boudreau et al., 2003; US EPA,
2012; Jacquet et al., 2012; Naile et al., 2013; Benskin et al.,
2013), as well as being used directly in surfactants, insecticides,
and protective coatings for paper, textile, carpets, and clothing
(Renner, 2008). In particular, PFOS has been characterized as having either a potential or conﬁrmed adverse impact on both human
health, i.e., cancer risks, and the environment, i.e., bioaccumulation
and/or biomagniﬁcations within wildlife (Key et al., 1997; Giesy
and Kannan, 2001; OECD, 2002; Boudreau et al., 2003; Clarke
and Smith, 2011; US EPA, 2012). For these reasons, PFOS was listed
as a persistent organic pollutant in Annex B of the Stockholm Convention in 2009 (Wang et al., 2009). PFCs have been produced since
the 1950s (US EPA, 2012), yet there still is insufﬁcient knowledge
on the degradation of PFOS, because they have relatively recently
been recognized as pollutants of importance (Howard and Muir,
2010). Thus, in recent years the development of sustainable
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.01.072
0045-6535/ 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
⇑Corresponding authors. Address: Gyeongnam Department of Environmental
Toxicology and Chemistry, Korea Institute of Toxicology (KIT), 17 Jeigok-gil,
Munsan-eup, Jinju, Gyeongsangnam-do 660-844, Republic of Korea (B.G. Kwon).
Tel.: +82 062 530 1858; fax: +82 062 530 0742.
E-mail
addresses:
kwonbg0@daum.net
(B.G.
Kwon),
sychung@jnu.ac.kr
(S.-Y. Chung).
Chemosphere 109 (2014) 221–225
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Chemosphere
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/chemosphere

## Page 2

treatment methods for PFOS degradation has become an important
challenge.
Several process technologies for PFOS treatment in water have
been reported. Previous studies have shown that most conventional degradation processes are ineffective for the degradation
of PFOS, because this compound including high energy carbon–
ﬂuorine in PFOS molecule is inherently recalcitrant to chemical
and biodegradation treatments (Key et al., 1998; Boudreau et al.,
2003; Cheng et al., 2008; Vecitis et al., 2008; Takagi et al., 2011;
Yu et al., 2009; Jacquet et al., 2012; Benskin et al., 2013). For example, advanced oxidation processes (AOPs), which commonly utilize
OH such as direct photolysis in the presence of either H2O2 and
Fe2O3, UV–ozonation, peroxone (O3–H2O2), and Fenton’s process,
have been shown to be ineffective for PFOS degradation (3M,
2003; Vecitis et al., 2008). In a recent study, it has been reported
that PFOS was decomposed by 68% after 10 d by direct photolysis
at 254 nm light (Yamamoto et al., 2007). In contrast, the sonolytic
process as an AOP could be effective in treating PFOS in aqueous
solution by means of in situ pyrolytic reactions in the vapor and
interfacial regions (Cheng et al., 2008; Vecitis et al., 2008). Thermal
processes at high temperatures (above 300 C) can be very effective method for decomposition of PFOS (Wang et al., 2013). Furthermore, PFOS could be separated from aqueous solutions by
fresh activated carbon and reverse osmosis units (US EPA, 2012).
However, the processes mentioned above do not represent a sustainable treatment method for PFOS decomposition, because of
the large energy consumption as well as the secondary contamination, such as that as arising from the need for disposal of used activated carbon. As a result, these physico-chemical treatment
processes can be inadequate and limited for the degradation of
ubiquitous PFOS.
Until recently, PFOS has been perceived as being biologically inert (Key et al., 1997, 1998; OECD, 2002; Liou et al., 2010). Hence,
there is a general understanding that PFOS is more difﬁcult to biologically remediation, however, it is not biologically inactive by
means of the effect of uncoupling in the presence of various monoamines and related compounds (Key et al., 1997). As a result, few
reports on the biodegradation of PFOS as a highly sustainable treatment process are available (Key et al., 1998; Yu et al., 2009; Takagi
et al., 2011). Therefore, further research is needed to evaluate the
biodegradation of PFOS as a suitable alternative tool.
The objective of the present work is to assess whether PFOS is
degradable by aerobic microbes arising from activated sludge
and soil, which is part of an ongoing program of investigation of
enhanced biodegradation of PFOS. In this study, we have identiﬁed the strain which is capable of degrading PFOS. Therefore,
these data are important for assessing the fate of PFOS in the
environment.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Chemicals and media
PFOS (40% in H2O, St. Louis, MO) was purchased from Aldrich.
Isotopically labeled internal standard of 13C4-PFOS and other PFCs,
i.e.,
perﬂuorobutane
sulfonate
(PFBS)
and
perﬂuorohexane
sulfonate (PFHxS) as products of PFOS biodegradation, were purchased from Wellington Laboratories (Guelph, ON, Canada). Other
chemicals used in this study were ACS grade reagents and were
obtained from Sigma–Aldrich. All solutions were made with
high-purity water from a Millipore ultra-puriﬁcation system
(>18 MX cm).
Strains for the degradation of PFOS were routinely cultivated in
two deﬁned media, C medium and Luria Bertani (LB) medium,
respectively. In order to cultivate and grow the strain, C medium
as a liquid phase contained (g L1) (NH4)2SO4, 5.0; KH2PO4, 1.0;
K2HPO4, 2.0; MgSO4 7H2O, 0.2; NaCl, 2.0; CaCl22H2O, 0.01;
FeSO47H2O, 0.01; and 2.0 mL trace elements solution. Trace elements
solution
contained
(g L1)
MoO3,
0.001;
ZnSO47H2O,
0.007;
CuSO45H2O,
5.0  104;
H3BO3,
0.001;
MnSO45H2O,
0.001; CoCl26H2O, 0.001; NiSO47H2O, 0.001. The ﬁnal pH of C
medium was approximately 7.0.
In order to observe the form of the strain for the degradation of
PFOS, LB medium as a solid phase contained (g L1) tryptone, 10;
yeast extract, 5; NaCl, 10; agar, 15. The ﬁnal pH of LB medium
was approximately 7.0.
2.2. Collection of sludge and soil as inoculum sources
In this study, activated sludge, as a mixture of wastewater and
sewage sludge, was collected from the complete mixing aeration
tank of 15 municipal wastewater treatment plants in Gwangju
and Seoul, Korea. Aerobic microbes for the biodegradation of PFOS
can be found in treated sludge, because wastewater treatment
sludge is a sink for environmental PFCs (Yu et al., 2009; Takagi
et al., 2011) as well as a host of other synthetic chemicals. In addition, soil, as a potential inoculum source, was obtained from the
surroundings of the wastewater treatment plants. Sludge and soil
were sampled in 2 L polypropylene bottles using a metal spatula,
and were kept on ice in the ﬁeld and refrigerated at 4 C in the laboratory prior to use.
2.3. Isolation of strain
The strain of aerobic microbes was isolated from samples of
sludge and soil as mentioned above. In this study, soil slurry was
diluted with aliquot of the autoclaved water. The strain for the biodegradation of PFOS was then grown and maintained by adding
respective samples into C medium containing 600 mg L1 PFOS
as a substrate. These experiments were performed at a temperature of 30 ± 2 C on an orbital shaker at 120 rpm. Growth of the
strain was conﬁrmed by the naked eye after a few days. This strain
was inoculated with 1% (v/v) in the same medium again and was
then subcultured more than 10 times in the same manner. The
strain isolated from the experiment using C medium was inoculated by streaking on LB medium using a pure separation technique, and was then incubated at 37 C for 1 d. Next, cultured
dominant single colonies were separated and repeatedly subcultured several times in LB medium in the same manner. For subsequent experiments, 650 lL of the strain was well mixed with
350 lL of 80% glycerol solution, autoclaved and was then stored
in a tube (1.7 mL, Microtubes MCT-175-C, Union City, CA) which
stored kept at 70 C.
2.4. Identiﬁcation of strain
API 20E kit (API 20E Enterobacteriaceae, BioMerieux, France)
was used to characterize a Gram-negative rod that is motile, catalase positive, and oxidase positive. Then, in order to evidently
conﬁrm the isolated strain identiﬁcation, sequencing of the PCR
ampliﬁed 16S rRNA gene was performed at a commercial laboratory (SolGent in Daejeon, Korea). In this analysis, the PCR reaction
mixture consisted of 2 lL dNTP, 2 lL phosphate buffer with magnesium sulfate, 0.2 lL of 50, 30 5 lM primer, 10 lL DNA template,
and 5 lL rTaq. Finally, sequences were compared to the National
Center for Biotechnology Information database using the Basic
Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) to determine phylogenetic
similarities.
222
B.G. Kwon et al. / Chemosphere 109 (2014) 221–225

## Page 3

2.5. Microbial activity test
After about 24 h of incubation in LB medium, the motility of
separate microorganisms was investigated using an optical microscope (Olympus CX40, Japan). In addition, the microbial form was
observed using Gram staining.
2.6. Growth conditions using isolated strain
To evaluate the growth of isolated strains under various conditions of pH, 100 mL C medium was poured into a Erlenmeyer ﬂask
(300 mL) and the strain was inoculated at a concentration of 1% (by
volume) for cultures at each initial pH 3–10, as adjusted by
solutions of 1 N NaOH and 2 N HCl. Growth controls consisted of
inoculated medium without PFOS. Abiotic controls consisted of
medium uninoculated with PFOS. These media were incubated
aerobically at 30 C and were then shaken on a rotary shaker at
120 rpm. The growth of the cultured strain was determined after
1 h at 660 nm wavelength using a UV/Vis spectrophotometer
(Shimadzu UV 1601, Kyoto, Japan).
To evaluate the growth of the isolated strain under varying
temperature conditions, 100 mL C medium was poured into a
Erlenmeyer ﬂask (300 mL) and the strain was inoculated at a
concentration of 1% (by volume) for cultures at each deﬁned temperature (25–50 C). In this experiment, abiotic controls consisted
of uninoculated medium with PFOS. Growth of cultured strain was
determined spectrophotometrically every 1 h at 660 nm wavelength, as mentioned above.
2.7. Analytical methods
All samples were stored in PP bottles and were extracted using
solid-phase extraction (SPE) disk cartridges (Waters Oasis HLB,
Waters, Milford, MA) using previously described methods (Benskin
et al., 2013). 100 lL of 50 ng mL1 isotopically labeled internal
standard of 13C4-PFOS was added to the sample tube. SPE cartridges were pretreated by ﬂushing the cartridges with 6 mL of
HPLC-grade methanol followed by a rinse with 6 mL of deionized
water. The pretreated SPE cartridge was topped with a SPE cartridge tube adaptor (Supelco, USA) ﬁtted with a PP tubing connector. The water from the cartridge was then completely removed
through the pretreated SPE cartridge using a vacuum pump (GAST
Vacuum Pump, MFG) at a ﬂow rate of approximately 1 drop s1.
Samples were extracted by eluting 4 mL of HPLC-grade methanol twice (a total of 8 mL) using the cartridge adaptor. The eluent
was collected in a 30 mL PP bottle. This extract was reduced under
a steady ﬂow of ultrapure nitrogen (99.999%, Dae-Chang, Korea) to
1 mL and was then vigorously vortexed for 30 s. After ﬁltering by
using a 0.22 lm PP syringe ﬁlter (13 mm, HSW Norm-Ject model,
Whatman), this extract was transferred to an autosampler vial,
capped, and analyzed. The remaining extract was capped and
placed into a cooler at 4 C for storage for further instrumental
analysis.
Analysis of extracts including PFOS was accomplished by liquid
chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LCMS-2010 model,
Shimadzu, Japan). 1 lL extracts were injected onto an Eclipse
XDB-C18 analytical column (3.5 lm, 150  2.1 mm) which was
maintained at 40 C. The mobile phase consisted of 30% ammonium acetate (10 mM) in water and 70% acetonitrile at a ﬂow rate
of 0.2 mL min1. The detector voltage was set at 1.5 kV; nebulizing
gas ﬂow, 1.5 L min1; curved desolvation line temperature, 250 C.
All analyses were performed with negative ESI mode and multiple
reaction monitoring method on selected precursor and product
ions.
The calibration was established with the internal standardization method. The limits of detection for PFOS, PFBS and PFHxS were
determined as 4.3, 1.9, and 3.9 ng L1, respectively, based on the
signal-to-noise three (S/N = 3). The recovery of the SPE extraction
method from the pure water of 0.5 L (n = 3) was assessed with each
spiked concentration (200 ng L1) of PFOS, PFBS and PFHxS. The
recoveries of PFOS, PFBS and PFHxS were 100%, 62%, and 104%,
respectively.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Strain identiﬁcation
To understand PFOS biodegradation processes, its phylogenetic
identiﬁcation is considered to be the primary step, which can be
followed by isolation and laboratory pure-culture studies of the
important microorganism as a predominant population. An important question that should be addressed in the pure-culture studies
is the identiﬁcation of microbial species which have become the
important players in the biodegradation of PFOS. Hence, we monitored the populations of many wastewater facilities to examine
their biodegradability of PFOS. Among several species, one potential strain that best adapts to the PFOS biodegradation was isolated
from C medium through sub-culturing [Supplementary Material
(SM), Fig. SM-1]. Preliminary studies were conducted using different media to ascertain the best suited microbial candidate for PFOS
degradation, choosing C medium (data not shown). The strain cultured in our study was nominated arbitrarily with strain HJ4. Then,
the growth of strain HJ4 was observed from C medium inoculated
with PFOS. Strain HJ4 was a Gram negative rod type bacterium
(Fig. SM-2). Approximately 700 bp of the large subunit 16S rDNA
were ampliﬁed by PCR using primers targeting conserved 27F
(5 lM) (50-AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTC) and 1492R (5 lM) (50-ACGGCTACCTTGTTACGA) (data not shown). Results from BLAST searches
in the GenBank database conﬁrmed that sequences of isolated
strains were homologous to Pseudomonas aeruginosa, with 99%
similarity. The sequences obtained were deposited to GenBank
with the accession numbers of HJ4. This sequence of isolated
strains as bacteria is provided in Supplementary information
(Table SM-1). Some researchers have demonstrated that PFCs can
be biologically degraded by the identiﬁed D2 strain of Pseudomonas
ﬂuorescens (Key et al., 1998), but a bacteria species for PFOS
biodegradation has not been reported up to now.
3.2. pH condition on strain HJ4
To gain an insight into the activity of the identiﬁed strain HJ4, as
well as to determine optimal growth conditions, it was subjected
to varying pH conditions. The optimal growth conditions of the isolated strain were investigated in the pH range of 3–10 and at a constant temperature of 35 C in C medium. A series of experiments
were carried out in C medium inoculated with PFOS.
The growth of strain HJ4 under varying pH values is shown in
Fig. 1a. As shown in Fig. 1a, the growth of strain HJ4 at the initial
stage was relatively slow, especially in the pH range of 7–9, but
after 5 h, its growth steeply increased. Then, after 12 h, the growth
of strain HJ4 reached a plateau. In contrast, as shown in Fig. 1a, the
active growth of strain HJ4 was not observed within the pH range
of 3–5, or at pH 10. This result indicates that a pH range of 7–9 is
necessary for the growth of strain HJ4. Considering this result, all of
the following experiments were performed at pH 7.
3.3. Temperature condition on strain HJ4
The optimal growth conditions of the isolated strain was investigated within the temperature range of 25–50 C and at pH 7 in C
medium inoculated with PFOS. The growth of strain HJ4 under
B.G. Kwon et al. / Chemosphere 109 (2014) 221–225
223

## Page 4

varying temperature values is shown in Fig. 1b. As shown in Fig. 1b,
the growth of strain HJ4 at the initial stage was relatively very slow
from 0 to 4 h incubation time, but after 4 h, its growth steeply increased when incubated at constant temperatures of 35–37 C.
Then, after approximately 12 h, the growth of strain HJ4 reached
a plateau. In contrast, as shown in Fig. 1b, the growth of strain
HJ4 was very slow and minimal above 45 C over 24 h. Furthermore, the growth of strain HJ4 at a temperature range of approximately 30–35 C increased gradually with increasing incubation
time. This result indicates that a temperature range of 30–37 C,
i.e., 35–37 C, is optimal for the growth of strain HJ4, as a mesophilic microorganism. Thus, all of the following experiments were
performed at 35 C.
3.4. Biodegradation of PFOS by strain HJ4
Strain HJ4 was grown with PFOS as a substrate. In this study,
0.1% (volume) glucose was typically added into aqueous PFOS
and strain HJ4 solution. The addition of glucose has previously
been shown to accelerate the growth of strain HJ4 for PFOS biodegradation and while its use was not essential, it supported the
growth of strain HJ4. Based on this result, all experiments were
performed at pH 7.0 and a temperature 35 C in the presence of
0.1% glucose.
As shown in Fig. 2, PFOS over a range of concentrations (1400–
1800 lg L1) was gradually degraded by strain HJ4. PFOS concentration consistently decreased with the vigorous growth of strain
HJ4 over 48 h. At 48 h, PFOS was decomposed by approximately
67%, and thereafter its residual concentration was found to be constant. At the same time, the growth of strain HJ4 was observed to
be constant (data not shown). Thus, it indicates that the biodegradation of PFOS as a highly sustainable treatment process can be
very effective.
From this data, as mentioned above, further research needs to
evaluate the biodegradation of PFOS as a suitable alternative tool.
Hence, ﬂuoride ions, which can be generated from the biodegradation of PFOS, were investigated by using ionic chromatography, as
proposed by similar studies (Key et al., 1998; Liou et al., 2010).
However, no deﬂuorination was observed, even through several attempts at measurement. In addition, no change in ﬂuoride level
was observed in abiotic controls. Despite our extensive search for
microbial PFOS biodegradation, no evidence on deﬂuorination of
PFOS biodegradation has been uncovered. However, in this study,
PFBS and PFHxS were consistently detected as minor products.
The
concentrations
of
these
PFCs
were
in
the
range
of
4.0–26.0 ng L1. Furthermore, tandem MS analysis may show the
formation possibility of several unknown products (Fig. SM-3).
From this result, an alternative explanation would be the partial
cleavage of C–C bonds in the PFOS molecule, instead of C–F bonds,
having the rigidity conferred by the ﬂuorine substituent (Key et al.,
1998). As a result, further investigation of the mechanism of biodegradation of PFOS will require an understanding of the speciﬁc
characteristics,
i.e.,
the
unknown
enzyme(s)
and
cofactor(s)
through crude cell free extracts of strain HJ4, involved in the transformation of PFOS. This experiment is now on-going.
4. Conclusion
This study showed the biodegradation of PFOS by a speciﬁc
microorganism. We isolated the aerobic microorganism, strain
HJ4, for the biodegradation of PFOS. This species had 99% similarity
to P. aeruginosa strain HJ4, which is a gram negative and mesophilic bacteria (30–37 C). Under optimal conditions, the concentration of PFOS was biologically decomposed by approximately
67% at incubation time 48 h. However, the formation of ﬂuoride
ion from PFOS biodegradation was not observed. Nonetheless, this
study could contribute to the biodegradation of PFOS.
Acknowledgement
This research was ﬁnancially supported by the Ministry of
Environment
of
Korea
(the
next-generation
eco-innovation
Incubation time, h
0
5
10
15
20
25
Absorbance at 660 nm
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
25°
C 
30°
C 
35°
C 
37°
C 
45°
C 
50°
C 
Absorbance at 660 nm
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
pH = 3 
pH = 5 
pH = 6 
pH = 7 
pH = 9 
pH = 10 
a
b
Fig. 1. (a) pH effect on the growth of isolated strain HJ4 by change in absorbance.
(b) Temperature effect on the growth of isolated strain HJ4 by change in
absorbance. Note that a detailed explanation of the experimental conditions is
mentioned in the text.
Fig. 2. PFOS biodegradation by strain HJ4 and its growth according to incubation
time. Note that a detailed explanation of the experimental conditions is mentioned
in the text.
224
B.G. Kwon et al. / Chemosphere 109 (2014) 221–225

## Page 5

technology development Project promoted by Korea Environmental Industry & Technology Institute) in 2012 (Project Number:
412-111-008).
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in
the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.
2014.01.072.
References
3M, 2003. Environmental and Health Assessment of Perﬂuorooctane Sulfonic Acid
and Its Salts, prepared by 3M, US EPA docket AR 226-1486.
Benskin, J.P., Ikonomou, M.G., Gobas, F.A.P.C., Begley, T.H., Woudneh, M.B., Cosgrove,
J.R., 2013. Biodegradation of N-ethyl perﬂuorooctane sulfonamido ethanol
(EtFOSE) and EtFOSE-based phosphate diester (SAmPAP diester) in marine
sediments. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47, 1381–1389.
Boudreau, T.M., Wilson, C.J., Cheong, W.J., Sibley, P.K., Mabury, S.A., Muir, D.C.G.,
Solomon,
K.R.,
2003.
Response
of
the
zooplankton
community
and
environmental
fate
of
perﬂuorooctane
sulfonic
acid
(PFOS)
in
aquatic
microcosms. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 22, 2739–2745.
Cheng, J., Vecitis, C.D., Park, H., Mader, B.T., Hoffmann, M.R., 2008. Sonochemical
degradation of perﬂuorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) and perﬂuorooctanoate (PFOA)
in landﬁll groundwater: environmental matrix effects. Environ. Sci. Technol. 42,
8057–8063.
Clarke, B.O., Smith, S.R., 2011. Review of ‘emerging’ organic contaminants in
biosolids and assessment of international research priorities for the agricultural
use of biosolids. Environ. Int. 37, 226–247.
Giesy, J.P., Kannan, K., 2001. Global distribution of perﬂuorooctane sulfonate in
wildlife. Environ. Sci. Technol. 35, 1339–1342.
Howard, P.H., Muir, D.C.G., 2010. Identifying new persistent and bioaccumulative
organics among chemicals in commerce. Environ. Sci. Technol. 44, 2277–2285.
Jacquet, N., Maire, M.A., Landkocz, Y., Vasseur, P., 2012. Carcinogenic potency of
perﬂuorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) on Syrian hamster embryo (SHE) cells. Arch.
Toxicol. 86, 305–314.
Key, B.D., Howell, R.D., Criddle, C.S., 1997. Fluorinated organics in the biosphere.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 31, 2445–2454.
Key, B.D., Howell, R.D., Criddle, C.S., 1998. Deﬂuorination of organoﬂuorine sulfur
compounds by Pseudomonas sp. strain D2. Environ. Sci. Technol. 32, 2283–2287.
Liou, J.S.-C., Szostek, B., DeRito, C.M., Madsen, E.L., 2010. Investigating the
biodegradability of perﬂuorooctanoic acid. Chemosphere 80, 176–183.
Llorca, M., Farré, M., Tavano, M.S., Alonso, B., Koremblit, G., Barceló, D., 2012. Fate of
a broad spectrum of perﬂuorinated compounds in soils and biota from Tierra
del Fuego and antarctica. Environ. Pollut. 163, 158–166.
Naile, J.E., Khim, J.S., Hong, S., Park, J., Kwon, B.-O., Ryu, J.S., Hwang, J.H., Jones, P.D.,
Giesy,
J.P.,
2013.
Distributions
and
bioconcentration
characteristics
of
perﬂuorinated compounds in environmental samples and collected from the
west coast of Korea. Chemosphere 90, 387–394.
OECD,
2002.
Co-operation
on
Existing
Chemicals
–
Hazard
Assessment
of
Perﬂuorooctane sulfonate and Its salts. Environment Directorate Joint Meeting
of the Chemicals Committe and the Working Party on Chemicals, Pesticides and
Biotechnology, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Paris, 21 November 2002.
Renner, R., 2008. PFOS phaseout pays off. Environ. Sci. Technol. 42, 4618.
Takagi, S., Adachi, F., Miyano, K., Koizumi, Y., Tanaka, H., Watanabe, I., Tanabe, S.,
Kannan, K., 2011. Fate of perﬂuorooctanesulfonate and perﬂuorooctanoate in
drinking water treatment processes. Water Res. 45, 3925–3932.
US EPA, 2012. Emerging Contaminants – Perﬂuorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS) and
Perﬂuorooctanoic Acid (PFOA). Emerginge Contaminants Fact Sheet – PFOS and
PFOA, EPA 505-F-11-002.
Vecitis, C.D., Park, H., Cheng, J., Mader, B.T., Hoffmann, M.R., 2008. Kinetics and
mechanism
of
the
sonolytic
conversion
of
the
aqueous
perﬂuorinated
surfactants, perﬂuorooctanoate (PFOA), and perﬂuorooctane sulfonate (PFOS)
into inorganic products. J. Phys. Chem. A 112, 4261–4270.
Wang, T., Wang, Y., Liao, C., Cai, Y., Jiang, G., 2009. Perspectives on the inclusion of
perﬂuorooctane sulfonate into the Stockholm convention on persistent organic
pollutants. Environ. Sci. Technol. 43, 5171–5175.
Wang, F., Shih, K., Lu, X., Liu, C., 2013. Mineralization behavior of ﬂuorine in
perﬂuorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) during thermal treatment of lime-conditioned
sludge. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47, 2621–2627.
Yamamoto, T., Noma, Y., Sakai, S.-I., Shibata, Y., 2007. Photodegradation of
perﬂuorooctane sulfonate by UV irradiation in water and alkaline 2-propanol.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 41, 5660–5665.
Yu, J., Hu, J., Tanaka, S., Fujii, S., 2009. Perﬂuorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) and
perﬂuorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in sewage treatment plants. Water Res. 43, 2399–
2408.
Zareitalabad, P., Siemens, J., Hamer, M., Amelung, W., 2013. Perﬂuorooctanoic acid
(PFOA) and perﬂuorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) in surface waters, sediments,
soils and wastewater – a review on concentrations and distribution coefﬁcients.
Chemosphere 91, 725–732.
B.G. Kwon et al. / Chemosphere 109 (2014) 221–225
225

