# d5va00106d

**Source PDF**: d5va00106d.pdf

---

## Page 1

Unique adaptations of a photosynthetic microbe
Rhodopseudomonas palustris to the toxicological
eﬀects of perﬂuorooctanoic acid†
Mark Kathol,‡a Anika Azme,‡b Sumaiya Saifur,c Nirupam Aich
*b and Rajib Saha
*a
In this study, we investigate the PFOA removal capabilities of Rhodopseudomonas palustris (R. palustris), a ﬂuoroacetate dehalogenase
containing microbe, as a potential candidate for achieving bioremediation. In the 50-day PFOA uptake experiment, R. palustris removed
44 ± 6.34% PFOA after 20 days of incubation, which was then reduced
to a ﬁnal removal of 6.23 ± 12.75%. Results indicate that PFOA was
temporarily incorporated into the cell membrane before being
partially released into the media after cell lysis. This incorporation
might be attributed to the combined eﬀect of the hydrophobic
interaction between PFOA and the cell membrane and the reduced
electrostatic repulsion from the high ion concentration in the growth
medium. The growth of R. palustris during the PFOA uptake experiment was 45-fold slower than their growth without PFOA. This study
also completely deﬁnes the toxicity range of PFOA for R. palustris
through a toxicity assay. Increasing PFOA concentration reduced
microbial growth, with complete inhibition observed at around
200 ppm. An accelerated growth phase was followed by a temporary
death phase in the ﬁrst 24 hours in the presence of 12.5–100 ppm
PFOA, implying a unique adaptation mechanism to PFOA.
1.
Introduction
Per- and polyuoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a group of >10 000
uorinated synthetic compounds that are highly toxic and environmentally persistent. These compounds are diﬃcult to break
down due to the high energy C–F bonds.1 This leaves a large PFAS
accumulation in our soil and water resources and raises concerns
for potential human and ecological toxicity.2,3 PFAS has shown
toxicological properties against environmental soil microbes,
including negative eﬀects on soil respiration and soil bacteria
enzyme activity.4 Also, when a soil microbial community was
exposed to peruorooctanoic acid (PFOA), the growth of soil
microbes was reduced; however, the negative eﬀects were somewhat temporary, and the community recovered within a year.5
Conversely, microbial degradation of PFAS is considered one
of the most desirable remediation strategies due to the advantages of lower capital and operational costs than abiotic
methods.6,7 Many recent studies have attempted to nd organisms from high PFAS concentration eﬄuent streams that utilize
PFAS as a potential carbon source for growth.8 However, due to
the strength of C–F bonds, PFAS are not nearly as attractive for
bacteria to utilize as a carbon source compared to others, such as
sugars or lignocellulosic biomass, and there is no known enzymatic pathway which utilizes it as an energy source.9 However,
several
“proof-of-concept”
studies
have
demonstrated
the
potential of certain microbial species to degrade PFAS. These
include Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6,10 dehalogenase possessing
strains such as Dechloromonas sp. CZR5,11 and various Pseudomonas species, such as Pseudomonas parafulva.12,13
aDepartment
of
Chemical
and
Biomolecular
Engineering,
University
of
Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68510, USA. E-mail: rsaha2@unl.edu
bDepartment of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln,
Lincoln, NE 68588, USA. E-mail: nirupam.aich@unl.edu
cDepartment of Civil, Structural and Environmental Engineering, University at Buﬀalo,
The State University of New York, Buﬀalo, NY 14260, USA
† Electronic
supplementary
information
(ESI)
available.
See
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1039/d5va00106d
‡ These authors have contributed equally to this work and share the rst
authorship.
Cite this: Environ. Sci.: Adv., 2025, 4,
1191
Received 19th April 2025
Accepted 1st July 2025
DOI: 10.1039/d5va00106d
rsc.li/esadvances
Environmental signicance
Widespread PFAS contamination in diﬀerent water matrices is one of the
current critical challenges. Contemporary treatment technologies struggle
to eﬀectively remove these compounds, necessitating the exploration of
alternative remediation strategies. Rhodopseudomonas palustris CGA009
(R. palustris) is a promising candidate for bioremediation avenues due to
its ability to consume recalcitrant carbon feedstocks and possession of
a uoroacetate dehalogenase enzyme. Here, we showcase that this
microbe can remove peruorooctanoic acid (PFOA) molecules from water
by incorporating them into the cells. In the presence of high PFOA
concentration, these microbes survive by uniquely adapting their growth
pattern. Understanding the mechanisms underlying R. palustris interactions with PFOA might pave the way for similar microbial-based treatment
technologies that mitigate PFAS from contaminated environments.
© 2025 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry
Environ. Sci.: Adv., 2025, 4, 1191–1197 | 1191
Environmental Science
Advances
COMMUNICATION
Open Access Article. Published on 01 July 2025. Downloaded on 11/18/2025 7:20:17 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
View Journal | View Issue

## Page 2

Rhodopseudomonas
palustris
(hereaer,
R.
palustris)
is
a highly adaptive Gram-negative, non-sulfur bacterium that can
be found in diverse environmental media, such as soil, aquatic
sediment, eutrophic ponds,14 animal waste lagoons,15 and
wastewater.16 R. palustris is known for its high environmental
hardiness, resisting the toxicological eﬀects of high metal
concentrations, and even removing them under these conditions.17,18 Furthermore, R. palustris is noteworthy for its ability to
break down recalcitrant carbon sources such as lignin breakdown products.19–21 This strain also possesses a uoroacetate
dehalogenase (rpa1163) enzyme. When puried from bacteria
(not R. palustris), this enzyme has been observed to cleave the
very strong C–F bond from uoroacetate22 and 2,3,3,3-tetra-
uoropropionic acid.23 To assess the potential of R. palustris for
PFAS biodegradation, it is crucial to study its interactions with
PFAS and directly evaluate the toxic eﬀects of these compounds
on its morphology and metabolic processes. Therefore, this
study aims to pave the road for future PFAS bioremediation
studies involving R. palustris and Gram-negative bacteria in
general by characterizing R. palustris' growth and adaptive
capabilities when exposed to PFOA as well as PFOA uptake and
toxicity to this organism.
2.
Methodology
To achieve our above-mentioned objectives, we rst conducted
a 50-day growth study for R. palustris in a photosynthetic media
(PM) with exposure to 50 ppm PFOA under anaerobic conditions. The setup consisted of a triplicate control group (lysed
cells) and a sample group (live cells). The toxicity eﬀects of PFOA
were evaluated by monitoring time dependent bacterial growth
through optical density measurements at 660 nm (OD660)24,25
and by assessing physical cell damage via transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) imaging.26,27 The PFOA uptake by R. palustris
was evaluated by measuring changes in PFOA concentration in
PM at diﬀerent time intervals using liquid chromatography
coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The
underlying mechanisms for uptake via cell membranes were
further explored via surface charge measurements of R. palustris
cells using a Zetasizer26,28 and anion concentration analysis in
PM using ion chromatography (IC). Moreover, a 5-day dosedependent toxicity assay was performed using PM spiked with
PFOA concentrations ranging from ∼0.78 to 200 ppm, and R.
palustris growth was measured using OD660. Detailed descriptions of the methodology are provided in the ESI (Section 1).†
3.
Results and discussion
3.1.
PFOA uptake by R. palustris
Fig. 1 presents the trend of PFOA uptake from the PFOA-spiked
PM containing lysed (control) and live (sample) cell cultures.
The PFOA concentration on day 0 was less than the desired
50 ppm initial concentration for both the live samples (36.14 ±
5.00 ppm) and lysed control groups (23.99 ± 2.57 ppm).
However, no degradation products were detected from the
aliquots collected on day 0. A prior check was performed by
preparing 50 ppm PFOA spiked PM without any culture and
analyzed similarly to the aliquots from the actual experiment.
This check reliably returned concentrations of 44 ± 1.83 ppm,
close to 50 ppm. Therefore, the discrepancy observed on day 0 is
attributed to the combination of the complex mixture (culture
presence in PM) and the potential adsorption on the glass
container used for the anaerobic reactor. While using additional controls such as glass containers with PFOA-spiked PM
containing no cells is recommended for future bioremediation
studies to verify the consumption of PFOA, previous studies
have also demonstrated that long-term interaction of PFOA with
borosilicate glass led to negligible adsorption.29–31 Henceforth
in this study, the PFOA concentration values of the live and
lysed groups measured on day 0, 36.14 ± 5.00 ppm and 23.99 ±
2.57 ppm, respectively, were used as the initial PFOA concentration in PM on day 0 (C0) to determine removal capacity (eqn
(S1)†). In the live sample group, the PFOA removal percentage
initially increased gradually to 44 ± 6.34% until day 20, stabilized from day 20–30, and then showed a signicant decrease to
6.23 ± 12.75% by day 50 (p < 0.05, Table S2†). In the lysed group,
PFOA levels increased from 23.98 ± 2.57 ppm on day 0 to 28.02
± 5.80 ppm on day 5 and reached 26.67 ± 4.00 ppm on day 10.
This increase might be attributed to the initial adsorption of
PFOA onto lysed cells via hydrophobic interactions, followed by
the release of adsorbed PFOA due to structural degradation of
autoclaved cell membranes over time. However, PFOA removal
reached 12.19 ± 16.30% on day 20 for the lysed group, with nal
concentrations at 50 days showing no net uptake by the lysed
cells. Statistical analysis for the lysed group showed no signi-
cant change in removal from day 0 to day 50 concentration (p >
0.05, Table S2†). This indicated PFOA uptake was happening in
the presence of live culture. A similar observation has been reported for two Pseudomonas sp. strains, where the release of
peruorohexane sulfonate (PFHxS) occurred aer 15 days of
incubation.27 Another Gram-negative, photosynthetic bacterium, Synechocystis PCC 6803, has also been reported to release
peruorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) fractionally due to cell lysis.32
The signicant diﬀerence in the PFOA removal percentage
between the live and lysed bacteria during days 15–45 indicates
Fig. 1
PFOA removal trends in lysed and live R. palustris cells grown in
a 50 ppm PFOA spiked PM over 50 days. Error bars represent one
standard deviation for n = 3 samples.
1192 | Environ. Sci.: Adv., 2025, 4, 1191–1197
© 2025 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry
Environmental Science: Advances
Communication
Open Access Article. Published on 01 July 2025. Downloaded on 11/18/2025 7:20:17 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

## Page 3

that more PFOA is uptaken by live R. palustris cells than by lysed
ones (p < 0.05, Table S2†). The gradual increase in PFOA uptake
(until day 20) and release in later days might be a result of
a complex interaction process that includes physical hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions, along with biological ion
transport mechanisms. The uptaken PFOA might be incorporated into the phospholipid bilayer of the cell membrane, likely
due to hydrophobic interaction.28 Additionally, the presence of
various proteins on the cell membrane and the proteinophilicity
of PFAS compounds might also facilitate PFOA uptake.33 The
PFOA decrease in PM might be due to physical PFOA adsorption
on the outer cell surface and its incorporation into the cell.
When suspended in deionized (DI) water, the live and lysed R.
palustris cells from day 20 have shown high negative charges of
−36.9 ± 0.977 mV and −43.9 ± 0.912 mV, respectively
(Fig. S2.1†). As both PFOA and R. palustris have high negative
surface charges, electrostatic repulsion would hinder the
adsorption of PFOA on the cells. However, the high ion
concentrations (calculated to be 189.42 mM) in the PFOAspiked PM reduced the surface charges to −9.31 ± 0.83 mV
and −14.2 ± 0.625 mV for the live and lysed cell cultures,
respectively (Fig. S2.1†). This would allow PFOA to be near the
cells and partition to cell membranes driven by hydrophobicity.
Throughout the 50-day experiment, live bacteria cells had
uptaken more PFOA than lysed cells. This is because a higher
negative surface charge on the lysed bacteria would result in
stronger electrostatic repulsion between PFOA and the lysed cell
than the live ones. While active ion transport in live bacteria
might also facilitate PFOA uptake, the absence of functional ion
transport mechanisms in lysed cells prevented PFOA uptake.
Moreover, due to inactive ion transport and damaged cell
membranes, charged molecules might leak from within the
lysed cell and accumulate on the cell surface.34 This would
explain the lysed cells having more negative surface charge than
live bacteria, a nding consistent with other studies.34,35
Furthermore, bacterial growth in the live group might increase
biomass content over time compared to the lysed group,
contributing to higher PFOA removal by live bacteria than the
lysed ones. Cell lysis might be responsible for the eventual
partial release of the incorporated PFOA.32
3.2.
Free anion mass balance in PM
Since day 20 exhibited the highest PFOA removal (Fig. 1), the live
group PM was further analyzed to determine possible nutrient
consumption and identify other anion generation, such as uoride (F−). IC results showed 90.01 ± 7.64 ppm chloride, 3051.30
± 242.62 ppm phosphate, and 2279.56 ± 214.84 ppm sulfate in
the PM at day 20 (Fig. S2.2†). While the chloride and sulfate
concentrations remained constant in the PM, the phosphate
concentration decreased 67.87% from the initial concentration
of 9497 ppm. As phosphate acts as a crucial nutrient for cell
development and function in R. palustris, the decrease in phosphate amount over 20 days indicated the growth of R. palustris in
PFOA spiked PM.15,36 However, no uoride ion was detected in
the PM, indicating that the PFOA uptaken by the microbe had
only been stored in the cells and not metabolized. While the ions
available in the PM media are essential for bacterial growth and
assist sorption by reducing electrostatic repulsion between PFOA
and cell surface, the extensive eﬀect of high ionic strength and
ionic composition on the PFOA sorption capability of bacteria
remains unclear.33 Furthermore, high ion concentrations have
been observed to signicantly reduce the critical micelle
concentration (CMC) of PFAS compounds.37,38 PFOA has a high
CMC value of 10 350 ppm (∼26 mM).39,40 However, hemi-micelle
formation on a solid surface is feasible at concentrations 0.001–
0.01 times the CMC.41 As the starting PFOA concentration
(50 ppm or 0.12 mM) in this experiment was within the feasibility
limit (0.025–0.25 mM), some hemi-micelles might have formed
via the attachment of the hydrophobic tail of PFOA on the cell
surface. The formation of aggregated PFOA molecules on the cell
surface would reduce the amount of free PFOA molecules in the
PM. Hence, high ion concentration in PM might positively aﬀect
bacteria's sorption capacity and lower bioavailability. In wastewater treatment systems, the ionic strength of streams ranges
from 3–100 mM, highlighting the need for further research into
the
suitability
of
R.
palustris
for
integration
into
these
environments.
3.3.
R. palustris growth under PFOA exposure
To observe the eﬀects of PFOA on the growth of R. palustris,
OD660 was measured every sampling day (Fig. S2.3a†). Ideally,
this would have produced a curve where the growth of R. palustris cultures exposed to PFOA would be either identical to or
slightly higher than the control acetate curves. However, wild
type R. palustris exhibits signicantly slower growth when
exposed to PFAS than when exposed to acetate. An anaerobic
wild type R. palustris culture (without PFAS) would typically take
3–5 days to reach a maximum OD660 of roughly 0.6 (Fig.-
S2.3b†),20,42,43 whereas our PFOA-exposed live cultures grew at an
incredibly slow rate, taking 45 days to reach the same maximum
OD660. As our experiment allowed for continuous growth by
supplementation of 2 mM sodium acetate every 5th day, the
reduced max OD660 and slower growth rate strongly suggest that
our cultures are continuously experiencing cell lysis from the
toxicological eﬀects of PFOA. A second noticeable trend we
observed was an initial, large, albeit temporary, increase in
OD660 and the presence of two growth phases, or diauxic growth
(before and aer day 10). This type of growth usually occurs in
cultures with two carbon sources, where an organism preferentially consumes one over the other.44–46 However, due to the
lack of uoride present in the media aer growth and the
inconsistent PFOA mass balance, this might instead be the
result of an adaptive phase, where R. palustris responds to PFOA
exposure. The apparent accelerated death phase might then be
explained by cell lysis before R. palustris has fully adapted. pH
change was also trivial for the duration of the experiment,
owing to the high amount of phosphate present in the media
(Fig. S2.4†).
3.4.
PFOA eﬀect on R. palustris morphology
To further evaluate the toxic eﬀects of PFOA, the TEM images
(Fig. S2.5†) provided additional information on the live cell
© 2025 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry
Environ. Sci.: Adv., 2025, 4, 1191–1197 | 1193
Communication
Environmental Science: Advances
Open Access Article. Published on 01 July 2025. Downloaded on 11/18/2025 7:20:17 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

## Page 4

structure and growth in the presence and absence of PFOA.
Healthy wild type R. palustris cell cultures without PFOA exposure were observed to contain nucleoid and smooth cell
membranes (Fig. S2.5a & b†). However, the high-magnication
images showed PFOA-exposed live cells from days 0, 20, and 35
with visible damages from possible oxidative stress, such as the
absence of nucleoids, cytoplasm leakage,47–49 detached cytoplasm from cell wall,50 cell wall disruption,50–52 and uneven cell
membranes (Fig. S2.5d, f, & h†).51 Similar damages in diﬀerent
bacterial cells from PFAS exposure have been reported in other
works.27,53 Due to the consistency in TEM imagery between these
studies involving metal oxides, chitosan, and PFOA, cell lysis
may be caused by these mechanisms.54 Even with these toxic
eﬀects, the low-magnication images (Fig. S2.5b, e, & g†)
showed an increasing number of live cells from day 0 to 35
under PFOA exposure. This corroborated with the growth curve
(Fig. S2.3†), indicating the ability of R. palustris to grow in the
presence of a high concentration of PFOA (i.e., 50 ppm).
3.5.
Dose-dependent toxicity assay
Given the irregular growth and morphological damage observed
in our initial 50 ppm experiment, a 5-day dose-dependent
toxicity assay was performed, in which wild-type R. palustris
was incubated with a gradient of PFOA concentrations. The
purpose of this experiment was to reproduce the irregular
growth prole observed in the 50 ppm concentration cultures
and to assess whether this eﬀect also exists or is amplied at
other PFOA concentrations. A 2× series dilution of PFOA supplemented PM media, ranging from nal concentrations of
200 ppm to ∼0.78 ppm, was prepared, as well as a control media
containing no PFOA (Fig. 2). 3 replicates of 500 mL anaerobic R.
palustris cultures were then prepared with each individual PFOA
concentration, and growth was measured every 12 hours. From
our results, two very interesting trends emerge; rstly, the initial
large temporary increase in OD660, which occurs in the rst 24
hours, is present for PFOA concentrations above 12.5 ppm. This
eﬀect begins at 12.5 ppm and increases in intensity until
100 ppm, where higher concentrations almost completely
inhibit sustained R. palustris growth. Only the 0.78 ppm culture
produces no signicant diﬀerence at any point during growth,
while concentrations 12.5 ppm and above produce signicantly
(p < 0.05) reduced growth aer 24 hours (Table S3†). Secondly,
these cultures appear to emulate diauxic growth behavior.
However, considering the lack of PFOA degradation as observed
from our mass balance and IC results, we hypothesize that this
may be a period during which R. palustris responds to the
toxicological eﬀects of PFOA. To the best of our knowledge, no
existing literature reports a growth pattern similar to the one we
have observed. This could imply a unique resistance or adaptation mechanism that R. palustris possesses, allowing it to grow
even in very high PFOA concentrations. A recent study demonstrated the ability of PFOA to incorporate itself into lipid bilayers up to a saturation limit, thereby expanding the bilayer and
increasing
membrane
uidity.55
Other
studies
also
list
membrane disruption, alongside oxidative stress and DNA
damage, as potential sources of cell lysis.26,56 Due to the similarity in image mechanisms, we hypothesize that the toxicity
gradient we observed results from this phenomenon, where
PFOA is saturating the cell membrane until it is ruptured.
However, the underlying mechanism of R. palustris to eﬀectively
respond to and recover from this toxicological eﬀect remains to
be understood.
4.
Conclusions
In summary, this study presents the potential of R. palustris for
PFOA removal and elucidates the microbes' unique adaptation
pattern to the toxic eﬀects of PFOA. At a high PFOA concentration of 50 ppm, R. palustris temporarily removed PFOA from
the surrounding media either by incorporation into or adsorption on the cell membrane. While the PFOA removal reached
a maximum uptake of ∼44% aer 20 days, eventual PFOA
release happens from the cell membrane. The full toxicity range
of PFOA on R. palustris is determined, where cultures exposed to
∼0.78 ppm of PFOA are identical to cultures grown without
PFOA. The growth inhibition increases with increasing PFOA
concentration and is almost completely inhibited at 200 ppm. R.
palustris also exhibits interesting growth adaptation behavior,
where an initial growth phase is followed by an accelerated
death phase due to the high concentration of PFOA. Another
growth phase follows when R. palustris cultures are supplemented with 12.5–100 ppm PFOA. This study demonstrates that
a PFOA concentration ceiling limit exists for eﬀective bioremediation; beyond that, R. palustris suﬀers severe toxicity eﬀects.
While no degradation product or uoride generation was
observed in this study, this strain has previously demonstrated
the ability to degrade other halogenated compounds at much
lower concentrations.57 Instead of showing evidence of degradation, R. palustris appears to simply uptake PFOA at this high
concentration. Hence, further research is needed to optimize
the growth conditions and establish an environment conducive
to enzymatic activity. Along with this, we plan to perform nontargeted
mass
spectroscopy
analysis
to
identify
if
any
unknown transformation products formed during this period of
PFOA exposure to R. palustris in future studies. Although further
Fig. 2
Wild type R. palustris grown on a 2× serial dilution of PFOA
(200–0.78 ppm) over 5 days. The growth curves exhibited an accelerated death phase in the initial hours (12–24 hours) for the PFOA
concentrations of 12.5–200 ppm. With increasing PFOA concentrations, the maximum OD660 decreases. Error bars represent one standard deviation for n = 3 samples.
1194 | Environ. Sci.: Adv., 2025, 4, 1191–1197
© 2025 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry
Environmental Science: Advances
Communication
Open Access Article. Published on 01 July 2025. Downloaded on 11/18/2025 7:20:17 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

## Page 5

work is required to evaluate the bioremediation potential of R.
palustris
extensively,
the
results
presented
here
provide
groundwork on understanding the behavior of R. palustris and
similar Gram-negative bacteria in PFOA-contaminated media.
Data availability
All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are
present in the paper and/or the ESI.†
Conﬂicts of interest
There are no conicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Layman Seed Grant and Nebraska Collaboration Initiative
Grant awarded to R. S. and N. A. This work was also supported
by the National Science Foundation CAREER Grant (1943310)
awarded to R. S. This work was partially supported by National
Science Foundation Grant (2324853) awarded to N. A. The
research was partially performed at the UNL Nebraska Center
for Biotechnology. We thank Dr You Zhou and Dr Bara Altartouri from the NCB Microscopy Core Research Facility for their
assistance with the TEM sample preparation and imaging.
References
1 H. Son, T. Kim, H.-S. Yoom, D. Zhao and B. An, The
Adsorption
Selectivity
of
Short
and
Long
Perand
Polyuoroalkyl Substances (PFASs) from Surface Water
Using Powder-Activated Carbon, Water, 2020, 12(11), 3287.
2 G. M. Sinclair, S. M. Long and O. A. H. Jones, What are the
eﬀects
of
PFAS
exposure
at
environmentally
relevant
concentrations?, Chemosphere, 2020, 258, 127340.
3 Y. Wang, U. Munir and Q. Huang, Occurrence of per- and
polyuoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in soil: Sources, fate, and
remediation, Soil Environ. Health, 2023, 1(1), 100004.
4 B. Xu, G. Yang, A. Lehmann, S. Riedel and M. C. Rillig,
Eﬀects of peruoroalkyl and polyuoroalkyl substances
(PFAS) on soil structure and function, Soil Ecol. Lett., 2023,
5(1), 108–117.
5 R. Xu, W. Tao, H. Lin, D. Huang, P. Su, P. Gao, et al., Eﬀects
of
Peruorooctanoic
Acid
(PFOA)
and
Peruorooctane
Sulfonic Acid (PFOS) on Soil Microbial Community, Microb.
Ecol., 2022, 83(4), 929–941.
6 Z.
Zhang,
D.
Sarkar,
J.
K.
Biswas
and
R.
Datta,
Biodegradation
of
perand polyuoroalkyl
substances
(PFAS): A review, Bioresour. Technol., 2022, 344, 126223.
7 E. Shahsavari, D. Rouch, L. S. Khudur, D. Thomas, A. AburtoMedina and A. S. Ball, Challenges and Current Status of the
Biological Treatment of PFAS-Contaminated Soils, Front.
Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2021, 8, 602040.
8 M. Marciesky, D. S. Aga, I. M. Bradley, N. Aich and C. Ng,
Mechanisms and Opportunities for Rational In Silico
Design of Enzymes to Degrade Per- and Polyuoroalkyl
Substances (PFAS), J. Chem. Inf. Model., 2023, 63(23), 7299–
7319.
9 D. B. Harper, D. O'Hagan and C. D. Murphy, Fluorinated
Natural Products: Occurrence and Biosynthesis, in Natural
Production of Organohalogen Compounds, ed. Gribble G.,
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2003, pp.
141–169.
10 M. Ruiz-Urigüen, W. Shuai, S. Huang and P. R. Jaﬀ´e,
Biodegradation of PFOA in microbial electrolysis cells by
Acidimicrobiaceae sp. strain A6, Chemosphere, 2022, 292,
133506.
11 M. Long, C. W. Zheng, M. A. Roldan, C. Zhou and
B. E. Rittmann, Co-Removal of Peruorooctanoic Acid and
Nitrate
from
Water
by
Coupling
Pd
Catalysis
with
Enzymatic Biotransformation, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2024,
58(26), 11514–11524.
12 L. B. Yi, L. Y. Chai, Y. Xie, Q. J. Peng and Q. Z. Peng, Isolation,
identication, and degradation performance of a PFOAdegrading strain, Genet. Mol. Res., 2016, 15(2), 15028043.
13 L. Yi, Q. Peng, D. Liu, L. Zhou, C. Tang, Y. Zhou, et al.,
Enhanced
degradation
of
peruorooctanoic
acid
by
a genome shuﬄing-modied Pseudomonas parafulva YAB1, Environ. Technol., 2019, 40(24), 3153–3161.
14 A. Rayyan, T. Meyer and J. Kyndt, DraWhole-Genome
Sequence
of
the
Purple
Photosynthetic
Bacterium
Rhodopseudomonas
palustris
XCP,
Microbiol.
Resour.
Announce., 2018, 7(4), e00855.
15 M. K. Kim, K. M. Choi, C. R. Yin, K. Y. Lee, W. T. Im,
J. H. Lim, et al., Odorous swine wastewater treatment by
purple non-sulfur bacteria, Rhodopseudomonas palustris,
isolated from eutrophicated ponds, Biotechnol. Lett., 2004,
26(10), 819–822.
16 C.
S.
Harwood,
Rhodopseudomonas
palustris,
Trends
Microbiol., 2022, 30(3), 307–308.
17 I. Llorens, G. Untereiner, D. Jaillard, B. Gouget, V. Chapon
and M. Carriere, Uranium Interaction with Two MultiResistant
Environmental
Bacteria:
Cupriavidus
metallidurans CH34 and Rhodopseudomonas palustris,
PLoS One, 2012, 7(12), e51783.
18 C. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Z. Chan, S. Chen and S. Yang, Insights
into
arsenic
multi-operons
expression
and
resistance
mechanisms in Rhodopseudomonas palustris CGA009,
Front. Microbiol., 2015, 6, 180.
19 C. S. Harwood and J. Gibson, Anaerobic and aerobic
metabolism
of
diverse
aromatic
compounds
by
the
photosynthetic bacterium Rhodopseudomonas palustris,
Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1988, 54(3), 712–717.
20 B. Brown, C. Immethun, A. Alsiyabi, D. Long, M. Wilkins and
R.
Saha,
Heterologous
phasin
expression
in
Rhodopseudomonas
palustris
CGA009
for
bioplastic
production
from
lignocellulosic
biomass,
Metab.
Eng.
Commun., 2022, 14, e00191.
21 A. Alsiyabi, B. Brown, C. Immethun, D. Long, M. Wilkins and
R.
Saha,
Synergistic
experimental
and
computational
approach
identies
novel
strategies
for
polyhydroxybutyrate overproduction, Metab. Eng., 2021, 68,
1–13.
© 2025 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry
Environ. Sci.: Adv., 2025, 4, 1191–1197 | 1195
Communication
Environmental Science: Advances
Open Access Article. Published on 01 July 2025. Downloaded on 11/18/2025 7:20:17 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

## Page 6

22 W. Y. Chan, M. Wong, J. Guthrie, A. V. Savchenko,
A. F. Yakunin, E. F. Pai, et al., Sequence- and activity-based
screening of microbial genomes for novel dehalogenases,
Microb. Biotechnol., 2010, 3(1), 107–120.
23 Y. Li, Y. Yue, H. Zhang, Z. Yang, H. Wang, S. Tian, et al.,
Harnessing uoroacetate dehalogenase for deuorination
of uorocarboxylic acids: in silico and in vitro approach,
Environ. Int., 2019, 131, 104999.
24 M. Kathol, C. Immethun and R. Saha, Protocol to develop
a synthetic biology toolkit for the non-model bacterium R.
palustris, STAR Protoc., 2023, 4(2), 102158.
25 A. Govindaraju, J. B. McKinlay and B. LaSarre, Phototrophic
Lactate Utilization by Rhodopseudomonas palustris Is
Stimulated by Coutilization with Additional Substrates,
Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2019, 85(11), e00048.
26 G. Liu, S. Zhang, K. Yang, L. Zhu and D. Lin, Toxicity of
peruorooctane sulfonate and peruorooctanoic acid to
Escherichia coli: Membrane disruption, oxidative stress,
and DNA damage induced cell inactivation and/or death,
Environ. Pollut., 2016, 214, 806–815.
27 A. Presentato, S. Lampis, A. Vantini, F. Manea, F. Dapr`a,
S.
Zuccoli, et al., On the Ability of Peruorohexane
Sulfonate (PFHxS) Bioaccumulation by Two Pseudomonas
sp.
Strains
Isolated
from
PFAS-Contaminated
Environmental Matrices, Microorganisms, 2020, 8(1), 92.
28 N. J. M. Fitzgerald, A. Wargenau, C. Sorenson, J. Pedersen,
N.
Tufenkji,
P.
J.
Novak,
et
al.,
Partitioning
and
Accumulation of Peruoroalkyl Substances in Model Lipid
Bilayers and Bacteria, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52(18),
10433–10440.
29 J. Cao and F. Xiao, Interactions of per- and polyuoroalkyl
substances with polypropylene plastic and borosilicate
glass: Resolving key uncertainties for accurate analysis, J.
Hazard. Mater. Adv., 2024, 16, 100463.
30 S. Lath, E. R. Knight, D. A. Navarro, R. S. Kookana and
M.
J.
McLaughlin,
Sorption
of
PFOA
onto
diﬀerent
laboratory materials: Filter membranes and centrifuge
tubes, Chemosphere, 2019, 222, 671–678.
31 J. E. Zenobio, O. A. Salawu, Z. Han and A. S. Adeleye,
Adsorption of per- and polyuoroalkyl substances (PFAS)
to containers, J. Hazard. Mater. Adv., 2022, 7, 100130.
32 F.
Marchetto,
M.
Roverso,
D.
Righetti,
S.
Bogialli,
F. Filippini, E. Bergantino, et al., Bioremediation of Perand Poly-Fluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) by Synechocystis
sp. PCC 6803: A Chassis for a Synthetic Biology Approach,
Life, 2021, 11(12), 1300.
33 M. Dai, N. Yan and M. L. Brusseau, Potential impact of
bacteria on the transport of PFAS in porous media, Water
Res., 2023, 243, 120350.
34 C. Ayala-Torres, N. Hern´andez, A. Galeano, L. Novoa-Aponte
and C.-Y. Soto, Zeta potential as a measure of the surface
charge of mycobacterial cells, Ann. Microbiol., 2014, 64(3),
1189–1195.
35 R. E. Martinez, O. S. Pokrovsky, J. Schott and E. H. Oelkers,
Surface charge and zeta-potential of metabolically active
and dead cyanobacteria, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008,
323(2), 317–325.
36 C. Berne, B. Allainmat and D. Garcia, Tributyl phosphate
degradation by Rhodopseudomonas palustris and other
photosynthetic bacteria, Biotechnol. Lett., 2005, 27(8), 561–
566.
37 N. Downes, G. A. Ottewill and R. H. Ottewill, An investigation
of the behaviour of ammonium peruoro-octanoate at the
air/water interface in the absence and presence of salts,
Colloids Surf., A, 1995, 102, 203–211.
38 S.
Kancharla, R. Jahan, D.
Bedrov, M.
Tsianou and
P. Alexandridis, Role of chain length and electrolyte on the
micellization of anionic uorinated surfactants in water,
Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 628, 127313.
39 T.
Sahara,
D.
Wongsawaeng,
K.
Ngaosuwan,
W. Kiatkittipong, P. Hosemann and S. Assabumrungrat,
Highly eﬀective removal of peruorooctanoic acid (PFOA)
in water with DBD-plasma-enhanced rice husks, Sci. Rep.,
2023, 13(1), 13210.
40 S.
Kancharla,
D.
Dong,
D.
Bedrov,
M.
Tsianou
and
P.
Alexandridis,
Structure
and
Interactions
in
Peruorooctanoate Micellar Solutions Revealed by SmallAngle
Neutron
Scattering
and
Molecular
Dynamics
Simulations Studies: Eﬀect of Urea, Langmuir, 2021, 37(17),
5339–5347.
41 R. P. Schwarzenbach, P. M. Gschwend and D. M. Imboden,
Environmental Organic Chemistry, John Wiley & Sons, New
York, 2nd edn, 2003.
42 C. M. Immethun, M. Kathol, T. Changa and R. Saha,
Synthetic Biology Tool Development Advances Predictable
Gene
Expression
in
the
Metabolically
Versatile
Soil
Bacterium Rhodopseudomonas palustris, Front. Bioeng.
Biotechnol., 2022, 10, DOI: 10.3389/ioe.2022.800734.
43 B.
Brown,
C.
Immethun,
M.
Wilkins
and
R.
Saha,
Rhodopseudomonas palustris CGA009 polyhydroxybutyrate
production from a lignin aromatic and quantication via
ow cytometry, Bioresour. Technol. Rep., 2020, 11, 100474.
44 N. A. Tyrovouzis, A. S. Angelidis and N. G. Stoforos, Bi-phasic
growth of Listeria monocytogenes in chemically dened
medium at low temperatures, Int. J. Food Microbiol., 2014,
186, 110–119.
45 H. Sun, X. Zhang, D. Wang and Z. Lin, Insights into the role
of energy source in hormesis through diauxic growth of
bacteria in mixed cultivation systems, Chemosphere, 2020,
261, 127669.
46 R. Mahadevan, J. S. Edwards and F. J. Doyle 3rd, Dynamic
ux balance analysis of diauxic growth in Escherichia coli,
Biophys. J., 2002, 83(3), 1331–1340.
47 L. Moreira, N. M. Guimar˜aes, S. Pereira, R. S. Santos,
J. A. Loureiro, M. C. Pereira, et al., Liposome Delivery of
Nucleic Acids in Bacteria: Toward In Vivo Labeling of
Human Microbiota, ACS Infect. Dis., 2022, 8(7), 1218–1230.
48 I. Lopez-Heras, I. Theodorou, B. Ley, M. Ryan and A. Porter,
Towards Understanding the Antibacterial Activity of Ag
Nanoparticles: Electron microscopy in the analysis of the
materials-biology interface in the lung, Environ. Sci.: Nano,
2015, 2, DOI: 10.1039/C5EN00051C.
49 M. Schulte, M. Hensel, and K. Miskiewicz, Exposure to
stressors
and
antimicrobials
induces
cell-autonomous
1196 | Environ. Sci.: Adv., 2025, 4, 1191–1197
© 2025 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry
Environmental Science: Advances
Communication
Open Access Article. Published on 01 July 2025. Downloaded on 11/18/2025 7:20:17 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

## Page 7

ultrastructural heterogeneity of an intracellular bacterial
pathogen, bioRxiv, 2020, preprint, 2020.09.14.297432, DOI:
10.1101/2020.09.14.297432.
50 A. H. Phakatkar, F. Emre, A. Laura, S. Boao, N. Surya,
R. Ramin, et al., TEM Studies on Antibacterial Mechanisms
of Black Phosphorous Nanosheets, Int. J. Nanomed., 2020,
15, 3071–3085.
51 J. Kuang, Y. Lin, L. Wang, Z. Yan, J. Wei, J. Du, et al., Eﬀects
of PEF on Cell and Transcriptomic of Escherichia coli,
Microorganisms, 2024, 12(7), 1380.
52 Y. Ding, G. Wen, X. Wei, H. Zhou, C. Li, Z. Luo, et al.,
Antibacterial activity and mechanism of luteolin isolated
from Lophatherum gracile Brongn. against multidrugresistant Escherichia coli, Front. Pharmacol, 2024, 15,
1430564.
53 A.
E.
Lindell,
A.
Grießhammer,
L.
Michaelis,
D. Papagiannidis, H. Ochner, S. Kamrad, et al., Extensive
PFAS accumulation by human gut bacteria, bioRxiv, 2024,
preprint,
2024.09.17.613493,
DOI:
10.1101/
2024.09.17.613493.
54 J. Li and S. Zhuang, Antibacterial activity of chitosan and its
derivatives and their interaction mechanism with bacteria:
Current state and perspectives, Eur. Polym. J., 2020, 138,
109984.
55 T.
N.
Sobolewski,
R.
C.
Trousdale,
C.
L.
Gauvin,
C. M. Lawrence and R. A. Walker, Nanomolar PFOA
Concentrations
Aﬀect
Lipid
Membrane
Structure:
Consequences for Bioconcentration Mechanisms, Environ.
Sci. Technol., 2025, 59(1), 709–718.
56 N. J. M. Fitzgerald, M. F. Simcik and P. J. Novak,
Peruoroalkyl
Substances
Increase
the
Membrane
Permeability and Quorum Sensing Response in Aliivibrio
scheri, Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett., 2018, 5(1), 26–31.
57 Y.-J. Li, R. Wang, C.-Y. Lin, S.-H. Chen, C.-H. Chuang,
T.-H.
Chou,
et
al.,
The
degradation
mechanisms
of
Rhodopseudomonas
palustris
toward
hexabromocyclododecane
by
time-course
transcriptome
analysis, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 425, 130489.
© 2025 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry
Environ. Sci.: Adv., 2025, 4, 1191–1197 | 1197
Communication
Environmental Science: Advances
Open Access Article. Published on 01 July 2025. Downloaded on 11/18/2025 7:20:17 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

