# S0003683817050027

**Source PDF**: S0003683817050027.pdf

---

## Page 1

533
ISSN 0003-6838, Applied Biochemistry and Microbiology, 2017, Vol. 53, No. 5, pp. 533–538. © Pleiades Publishing, Inc., 2017.
Original Russian Text © S.P. Chetverikov, D.A. Sharipov, T.Yu. Korshunova, O.N. Loginov, 2017, published in Prikladnaya Biokhimiya i Mikrobiologiya, 2017, Vol. 53, No. 5,
pp. 477–483.
Degradation of Perfluorooctanyl Sulfonate
by Strain Pseudomonas plecoglossicida 2.4-D
S. P. Chetverikov*, D. A. Sharipov, T. Yu. Korshunova, and O. N. Loginov
Ufa Institute of biology of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, 450054 Russia
*e-mail: che-kov@mail.ru
Received April 14, 2017
Abstract⎯A bacterial strain has been isolated from soil contaminated by waste from petrochemical production. Based on its cultural-morphological, physiological-biochemical properties and an analysis of the nucleotide sequence of the 16S rRNA gene and phylogenetic analysis data, the strain was defined as Pseudomonas
plecoglossicida 2.4-D. The unique ability of this bacterium to use perfluorooctanyl sulfonate (PFOS) as the
only source of carbon and energy is shown. When cultivated in a liquid medium, the strain completely utilizes
this substance in 6 days. It is proved that P. plecoglossicida 2.4-D transforms PFOS to perfluoroheptanoic
(perfluoroenanthic) acid, while free fluorine ions are released into the medium. Upon introduction into the
soil, the strain was capable of PFOS degradation by 75%. The strain P. plecoglossicida 2.4-D is recommended
for environmental protection. It can be used in the development of biotechnologies for the transformation
(utilization) of fluoroorganic compounds.
Keywords: perfluorinated compounds, Pseudomonas, degradation, transformation, perfluorooctanyl sulfonate,
PFOS
DOI: 10.1134/S0003683817050027
INTRODUCTION
The modern growth of the chemical industry and
organic synthesis has been accompanied by environmental pollution by a wide spectrum of xenobiotics
detected in the components of natural geosystems;
they are toxic, able to bioaccumulate, and resistant to
degradation. Most of these pollutants are halogenated
compounds, which are often detected in industrial
effluents. The toxic properties of these compounds
make it necessary to use microorganisms in their utilization. The most resistant of the compounds comprising industrial emissions into the environment are fluorine-containing compounds, particularly, perfluorocarboxylic acids—synthetic chemical compounds used
in the industry of widely used fluoropolymers. They
also include surfactants (SAAs), which possess a high
chemical stability that makes them an ideal material
for extensive use in the production of different materials for waterproof and stain resistant coatings in textiles and lubricants to firefighting foam.
Perfluorocarboxylic acids were included in the
Addendum of the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, which recommended that
measures be taken to minimize and, if possible, stop
the production and use of these compounds [1].
In 2002 the biggest companies of the world—producers of fluorinated surfactants—stopped the production of products with perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS)
or its derivatives. The main reason to stop production
was the negative effect on the environment. PFOS,
which resistant to biodegradation, is now detected in
most objects of the environment and living organisms. It
is the most frequently detected pollutant of this class
[2–5].
PFOS pollution makes the problem of utilization of
these ecologically dangerous pollutants very topical.
Their incorporation into the natural metabolism and
energy exchange with the participation of microorganisms capable of mineralization can minimize their
negative effect on the environment. There are currently only individual reports concerning bacteria that
utilize perfluorocarboxylic acid and PFOS. They do
not reveal characteristics of biodegradation [6, 7];
however, it is known that other types of organofluorine compounds, such as nitroaniline, fluoroacetate,
fluorobenzene, perfluoro biphenyls, perfluorohexyl
sulfonate, etc. [8–12], can undergo biodestruction.
The goal of this work is to study the taxonomic
position and characteristics of a new PFOS-degrading
strain extracted from soil polluted with waste from the
petrochemical industry.
EXPERIMENTAL
The object of study was a natural strain extracted
from a sample of soil contaminated by waste from pet-

## Page 2

534
APPLIED BIOCHEMISTRY AND MICROBIOLOGY 
 Vol. 53 
 No. 5 
 2017
CHETVERIKOV et al.
rochemical production in a factory area (Bashkortostan republic, Russia).
Cumulative and pure cultures were obtained with
the use of Raymond’s mineral medium containing
PFOS as the only source of carbon (0.1 wt/vol %)
[13] (g/L): Na2CO3—0.1; MgSO4 ⋅ 7H20—0.2; FeSO4 ⋅
7H2O—0.02; CaCl2—0.01; MnSO4 ⋅ 7H2O—0.02;
K2HPO4 ⋅ 3H2O—1.0; NaH2PO4 ⋅ 3H2O—1.5;
NH4Cl—3.0. Culturing was performed at 28°С on a
shaker at 160 rpm. The intensity of culture growth
was estimated by the optical density of the cell suspension at a wavelength of 590 nm with a SF-56
spectrophotometer (Lomo, Russia).
The characterization of pure culture was performed
on the basis of cultural-morphological and physiological-biochemical indicators by the generally accepted
guides [14, 15].
Total DNA extraction was conducted in accordance with the method described in [16].
Amplification of the 16S rRNA gene was performed with universal primers [17]. Extraction and
purification of the PCR products was conducted from
low-melting agarose with a Wizard PCR Preps kit
(Promega, United States) in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions.
Sequencing of the obtained PCR products of
16S rRNA gene was performed with a Big Dye Terminator v.3.1 kit (Applied Biosystems Inc., United
States) with an ABI PRIZM 3730 automated DNA
Sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Inc., United States)
in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
The search for nucleotide sequences of 16S rRNA
genes homologous to the corresponding sequences of
the examined strain in the GenBank database was performed with the BLAST program (http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/blast) [18]. The dendrogram of the phylogenetic similarity was built in MEGA6 software [19]
by the neighbor-joining method [20] with the Kimura
model [21].
For the extraction and identification of products of
PFOS biotransformation and the determination of its
concentration in the environment, bacterial cells were
separated from the medium by ultrafiltration with Vivaflow 50 (Sartorius AG, Germany). The obtained filtrate
(≤3 kDa) was analyzed by chromatography mass spectrometry on tandem a LCMS-IT-TOF chromatograph
mass spectrometer (Shimadzu, Japan) with a system for
the introduction of eluted ions, a quadrupole ion trap,
and a time-of-flight detector. The mass spectra were
registered in the mass interval m/z 200–800 а.е.m. in
negative-ion mode, and the voltage in the detector was
3.5 kV. A Shim-pak XR-ODS column (75 × 2.0 mm)
(Shimadzu, Japan) in isocratic mode with a 56 : 44 solvent ratio of 5 mM ammonium acetate in water : acetonitril at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min was used for chromatographic division. Detection of the structure of the
obtained substances was performed on the basis of total
mass spectrometry data, based on degradation of the
molecular ion and a comparison with the literature
data.
The concentration of fluoride ions in the media
was measured with a fluoride-selective electrode with
an ELIS-131F crystal membrane (Measuring Equipment, Russia)
The ability to degrade PFOS in soil was estimated
under the conditions of a model experiment, in which
100 mL of cultured suspension of OD590 = 0.8 (with
100 mL of tap water as the control) was introduced
into the soil (per 1 kg), remixed with 0.5% PFOS, and
left at room temperature. The soil humidity was maintained by the introduction every 0.5 months of 100 mL
of tap water per 1 kg of soil with mixing. Soil samples
(100 g each) were taken after 0.5, 1, 2, 3, and 6 months,
and extraction with dichloromethane was conducted
for 10 min. The extract was filtered through filter
paper in a water bath at 50°С. The residual PFOS content was evaluated gravimetrically.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The cells of the studied 2.4-D strain are gram-negative moving bacteria with a diameter of 1.0 μm and a
length of 2.5-3.0 μm. In culturing on MPA, the strain
formed colonies of a white-cream colour that were
round, convex, and 4-5 mm in diameter. The metabolism was respiratory; the 2.4-D strain was catalasepositive, synthesized oxidase, was unable to perform
denitrification or hydrolysis of casein, gelatin, lecithin, and starch, did not synthesize lipolytic enzymes,
did not grow on twin-80 medium, and tested positive
for arginine dihydrolase. The optimal growth was at a
temperature of 26–30°С, and the optimal pH was
6.8–7.2. Intensive growth was observed with an NaCl
concentration of 0–5%, while growth appeared to be
slow with a NaCl higher concentration, up to 10%.
The 2.4-D strain did not use the following as the
sole source of carboxide: glucose, saccharose mannitol, fructose, sorbitol, inositol, maltose, arabinose,
xylose, mannose, galactose, lactose, rhamnose, mesoinositol, starch, levan, potassium tartrate. Succinate,
malate, citrate, 2-ketogluconate, ethanol, n-butanol,
propylene glycol, L-leucine, L-lysine, L-valine, L-alanine, L-arginine, L-aspartate, L-histidine were used as
a carboxide source. The cells of the strain synthesized
fluorescent pigment. The gene sequence (1383 bp) for
the extracted strain was later detected and deposited in
the GenBank under the number KY593189. The gene
codes 16S rRNA, which corresponds to sites 37 to 1419
according to E. coli nomenclature. The bacteria closest
to the studied specimen were Pseudomonas plecoglossicida and P. monteilii; the level of similarity of the
sequences of 2.4-D and P. plecoglossicida NBRC 103162,
P. monteilii NBRC 103158 strains was 99.86 and
99.78% respectively. Comparative analysis of the
nucleotide sequences of the 16S rRNA gene of the

## Page 3

APPLIED BIOCHEMISTRY AND MICROBIOLOGY 
 Vol. 53 
 No. 5 
 2017
DEGRADATION OF PERFLUOROOCTANYL SULFONATE
535
related pseudomonas species was conducted with the
construction of a dendrogram to detect the phylogenetic position of the strain (Fig. 1). The obtained data
made it possible to identify the studied strain as Pseudomonas plecoglossicida 2.4-D.
The Pseudomonas plecoglossicida 2.4-D strain
actively degrades PFOS as a sole source of carboxide
and energy in periodical culture (Fig. 2). Analysis of
the dynamics of the decrease in the PFOS concentration in the P. plecoglossicida 2.4-D cultural medium
showed that the culture adopted to substrate or performed preparatory metabolism in the first days
(decrease in the substrate concentration to less than
10%). Further linear growth of the substrate consumption of about 2% per day was observed. At the same
time the optical density of the culture medium started
to increase from the second day of cultivation, reaching its maximum at day 5 of cultivation.
It should be noted that an increase in the substrate
concentration to 0.5% inhibits bacterial growth, and
growth was blocked at concentration higher than 1.0%.
PFOS conversion was accompanied by the release
into the medium of free fluoride ions. Their concentration reached 150 mg/L in the culture medium (CM);
Fig. 1. Phylogenetic position of the P. plecoglossicida 2.4-D strain in accordance with analysis of the nucleotide sequence of the
16S rRNA gene. The scale shows the evolutionary distance corresponding to two nucleotide substitutions for each 1000 nucleotides. The statistical significance of the order of branching defined by bootstrap analysis is shown in numbers. (Bootstrap values
higher than 70% are shown).
Pseudomonas parafulva NBRC 16636 (BBIU01000051)
Pseudomonas fulva NBRC 16637 (BBIQ01000036)
Pseudomonas sp. 2.4-D
Pseudomonas plecoglossicida NBRC 103162 (BBIV01000080)
Pseudomonas monteilii NBRC 103158 (BBIS01000088)
Pseudomonas taiwanensis BCRC 17751 (EU103629)
Pseudomonas guariconensis PCAVU11 (HF674459)
Pseudomonas entomophila L48 (AY907566)
Pseudomonas mosselii CIP 105259 (AF072688)
Pseudomonas soli F-279208 (HF930598)
Pseudomonas japonica NBRC 103040 (BBIR01000146)
Pseudomonas cremoricolorata IAM 1541 (AB060137)
Pseudomonas putida NBRC 14164 (AP013070)
Pseudomonas asplenii LMG 2137 (Z76655)
Pseudomonas fuscovaginae ICMP 5940 (BATG01000120)
Pseudomonas songnenensis NEAU-ST5-5 (JQ762269)
Pseudomonas ﬂavescens B62 (U01916)
Pseudomonas punonensis LMTO3 (JQ344321)
Pseudomonas seleniipraecipitans CA5 (FJ422810)
Pseudomonas kuykendallii H2 (JF749828)
Pseudomonas benzenivorans DSM 8628 (FM208263)
Pseudomonas lutea DSM 17257 (JRMB01000004)
Pseudomonas graminis DSM 11363 (Y11150)
Pseudomonas coleopterorum Esc2Am (KM888184)
Pseudomonas rhizosphaerae DSM 16299 (CP009533)
Pseudomonas vancouverensis ATCC 700633 (AJ0115070)
Pseudomonas moorei RW10 (AM293566)
Pseudomonas umsongensis Ps 3-10 (AF468450)
Pseudomonas mohnii lpa-2 (AM293567)
Pseudomonas koreensis Ps 9-14 (AF463452)
Pseudomonas jessenii CIP 105274 (AF068259)
Pseudomonas helmanticensis OHA11 (HG940537)
Pseudomonas baetica a390 (FM201274)
77
77
74
80
90
100
94
77
88
84
99
94
89
75
0.002

## Page 4

536
APPLIED BIOCHEMISTRY AND MICROBIOLOGY 
 Vol. 53 
 No. 5 
 2017
CHETVERIKOV et al.
the beginning of the release correlated with the beginning of the linear decrease in the PFOS concentration.
The most preferable method for analysis of perfluorocarboxylic acids and anionic substances (including
PFOS) is currently liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry.
As is known from the literature, perfluorinated
organic acids are neutral and hardly biodegraded. A
dissociated acid ion is usually observed in the process
of chromatography–mass spectrometry of anionic
perfluorinated compound. The transformation of
PFOS (a molecular ion with an m/z of 499 аmu, is presented in Fig. 3; the mass spectrum MS1 is in Fig. 4a)
for 6 days in conditions of periodical culture. After
1 day, the presence of a component with a molecular
ion with an m/z of 419 аmu is possible when performing oxygenogenic or monooxygenase removal of a sulfonate group from PFOS (m/z of 80 аmu) in the form
of sulfite, which can be metabolized in starvation conditions. This agrees with the supposition on the bacterial preparative metabolism for further defluorination.
Further transformation (2–5 days) was accompanied by
active growth of the culture and release of fluoride ions
into the medium. After 3 days of cultivation in ultrafiltrate, a compound previously absent in the medium
with a molecular ion equal to an m/z of 363 amu was
found, along with components with m/z 499 and
419 compounds (Fig. 3c). On the following day, the
concentration of this component in CL increased, and
Fig. 2. Dependence of OD590 values of the culture
medium (1), PFOS concentrations (2), and free fluoride
ions (3) from the time of P. plecoglossicida 2.4-D cultivation in periodical culture are shown.
0.9
1
2
3
4
5
6
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1
2
3
OD590
days
g/L
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
 
499
499
499
499
419
419
419
363
363
(a)
363
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
min
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Fig. 3. Mass-chromatograms of P. plecoglossicida 2.4-D
culture liquid ultrafiltrates after 0 (a), 2 (b), 3 (c), 4 (d),
and 6 (e) days of cultivation in the periodical culture (m/z,
amu are indicated above the peaks).

## Page 5

APPLIED BIOCHEMISTRY AND MICROBIOLOGY 
 Vol. 53 
 No. 5 
 2017
DEGRADATION OF PERFLUOROOCTANYL SULFONATE
537
compounds of m/z 499 and 419 amu were not identified 6 days after cultivation. According to the MS1 and
MS2 mass spectra, the compound with an m/z equal to
363 amu was identified as perfluoroheptane (perfluoroenant) acid. This acid commonly has a precursor ion
with an m/z of 363 in the MS1 mass spectrum (Fig. 4b);
its fragmentation results in an ion product with an m/z
of 319 in the MS2 mass spectrum (Fig. 4c).
Thus, perfluoroheptane acid, which was identified
by a dissociated acidic ion, was found in the culture
medium at the end of cultivation. The results allowed
the supposition of the following scheme of PFOS
destruction (Fig. 5), in which four fluoride ions are
released into the medium, corresponding to their concentration (152 mg/L) and correlating with the
obtained result (1520 mg/L) with an initial PFOS concentration in the medium of 1.0 g/L.
The release of fluoride ions into the medium probably caused an inhibiting effect on the process of further destruction of intermediate fluoride compounds
by the studied strain.
As follows from Fig. 6, in an experiment on the
detoxification of soil polluted by PFOS, the bacteria
Fig. 4. MS1 mass spectra of PFOS (molecular ion with an
m/z of 499) (а) and MS1 (b) MS2 (c) component with an
m/z of 363 amu from the P. plecoglossicida 2.4-D CL ultrafiltrate after 3 days of cultivation. Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometer LCMS-IT-TOF (Shimadzu,
Japan).
8
6
4
2
200
300
400
500
600
(c)
700
800
I × 104
319
m/z
3
2
1
200
300
400
500
600
(b)
700
800
I × 105
319
m/z
363
3
2
1
200
300
400
500
600
(а)
700
800
I × 105
m/z
499
Fig. 5. Suggested scheme of bacterial PFOS destruction by
P. plecoglossicida 2.4-D strain: 1—PFOS (m/z of 499 amu),
2—perfluorooctane (m/z of 419 аmu), 3—perfluorooctanoic acid (m/z of 363 аmu).
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
O
O
SO3
1
2
3
H2O
CO2
4F–
O–
S
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
C–
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
O
O–
F
…
Fig. 6. Residual PFOS quantity in the soil after introduction of P. plecoglossicida 2.4-D strain (1). Control (2) without the induction of microorganisms.
100
%
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
months

## Page 6

538
APPLIED BIOCHEMISTRY AND MICROBIOLOGY 
 Vol. 53 
 No. 5 
 2017
CHETVERIKOV et al.
P. plecoglossicida 2.4-D showed the ability to actively
transform the substance, decreasing its residual content
to a level not exceeding 25% of the initial value. At the
same time, the dynamics of the decrease in the concentration was linear for the first two months, while significant changes were not noted in the control.
An analysis of the literature data concerning the
bacterial destruction of perfluorooctane sulfonic and
perfluorooctane acids showed that the number of bacterial strains able to use these substances is extremely
limited. Pseudomonas aeruginosa HJ4 [6] and the phylogenetically related strain P. parafulva YAB1 [7] were
described, but no references concerning PFOS as a
single source of carboxide and energy were found.
CONCLUSIONS
Thus, as a result of the conducted studies on the
basis of sum of cultural-morphologic, physiological,
and biochemical signs and phylogenetic analysis data,
the assignment of the 2.4-D strain to a species was
conducted. It was detected that Pseudomonas plecoglossicida 2.4-D bacteria possessed a unique ability to
use PFOS in water and soil as the sole source of carboxide and energy. The obtained data allow recommendation of this strain for use in the development of
biotechnologies concerning the transformation of
organofluorine compounds for the protection of the
environment and are also a basis for the further studies
of the adaptive-destructive potential of these bacteria.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Equipment of the BioAnalit Center for Shared Use
belonging to the Institute of Biology, Ufa Science Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, was used in the work.
REFERENCES
1. Report of the Conference of the Parties of the Stockholm
Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants on the Work of
Its Fourth Meeting, 4–8 May, UNEP /POPS/COP.4/38,
Geneva: Stockholm Convention Secretariat, 2009,
pp. 66–69.
2. Yamashita, N., Kannan, K., Taniyasu, S., Horii, Yu.,
Petrick, G., and Gamo, T., Mar. Pollut. Bull., 2005,
vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 658–668.
3. Anderson, M.E., Butenhof, J.L., Chang, S., Farrar, D.G.,
Kennedy, G.L., Lau, C., Olsen, G.W., Seed, J., and Wallace, K.B., Toxicol. Sci., 2008, vol. 102, no. 1, pp. 3–14.
4. Tao, L., Kannan, K., Kajiwara, N., Costa, M., Fillmann, G., Takahashi, S., and Tanabe, S., Environ. Sci.
Technol., 2006, vol. 40, no. 24, pp. 7642–7648.
5. Betts, K., Environ. Health Perspect., 2007, vol. 115,
no. 5, pp. 250–256.
6. Kwon, B.G., Lim, H.J., Na, S.H., Choi, B.I.,
Shin, D.S., and Chung, S.Y., Chemosphere, 2014,
vol. 109, pp. 221–225.
7. Yi, L.B., Chai, L.Y., Xie, Y., Peng, Q.J., and Peng, Q.Z.,
Genet. Mol. Res., 2016, vol. 15, no. 2, p. 15028043.
8. Davis, C.K., Webb, R.I., Sly, L.I., Denman, S.E., and
McSweeney, C.S., FEMS Microbiol. Ecol., 2012,
vol. 80, no. 3, pp. 671–684.
9. Amorim, C.L., Carvalho, M.F., Afonso, C.M.M., and
Castrol, P.M.L., Biodeter. Biodegr., 2013, vol. 80,
pp. 10–15.
10. Carvalho, M.F., Ferreira, J.R., Pacheco, C.C.,
De Marco, P., and Castro, P.M.L., Environ. Microbiol.,
2005, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 294–298.
11. Hughes, D., Clark, B.R., and Murphy, C.D., Biodegradation, 2011, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 741–749.
12. Wang, N., Liu, J., Buck, R.C., Korzeniowski, S.H.,
Wolstenholme, B.W., Folsom, P.W., and Sulecki, L.M.,
Chemosphere, 2011, vol. 82, no. 6, pp. 853–858.
13. Raymond, R.L., Develop. Industr. Microbiol., 1961,
vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 23–32.
14. Manual of Methods for General Bacteriology, Gerhardt, P.,
Murray, R.G.E., Costilow, R.N., Nester, E.W.,
Wood, W.A., Krieg, N. R., and Phillips, G.B., Eds.,
Washington, DC: Amer. Soc. Microbiol., 1981, vol. 3.
15. Bergey's Manual of Determinative Bacteriology, Holt, J.,
Krieg, N., Staley, J., and Williams, S., Eds., Baltimore:
Williams and Wilkins, 1994, vol. 1.
16. Wilson, K., Current Protocols in Molecular Biology, Ausube, F.M., Brent, L.R., Kingston, R.E., Moore, D.D.,
Seidman, J.G., Smith, J.A., and Struhl, K., Eds., New
York: Green Publishing Associates, 1995, pp. 241–245.
17. Lane, D.J., in Nucleic Acid Techniques in Bacterial Systematic, Stackebrandt, E. and Goodfellow, M., Eds.,
Chichester: John Wiley and Sons, 1991, pp. 115–177.
18. Camacho, C., Coulouris, G., Avagyan, V., Ma, N.,
Papadopoulus, J., Bealer, K., and Madden, T.L., BMC
Bioinformatics, 2009, vol. 10, p. 421.
19. Tamura, K., Peterson, D., Peterson, N., Stecher, G.,
Nei, M., and Kumar, S., Mol. Biol. Evol., 2011, vol. 28,
no. 10, pp. 2731–2739.
20. Saitou, N. and Nei, M., Mol. Biol. Evol., 1987, vol. 4,
no. 4, pp. 406–425.
21. Kimura, M., J. Mol. Evol., 1980, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 111–
120.
Translated by P. Kuchina

