# s11756-024-01654-0

**Source PDF**: s11756-024-01654-0.pdf

---

## Page 1

ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Biologia (2024) 79:1909–1918
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11756-024-01654-0
2012), neurotoxicity (Gallo et al. 2013), reproductive toxic­
ity (Leter et al. 2014), developmental toxicity (Halldorsson 
et al. 2012), endocrine toxicity (Lin et al. 2013) and poten­
tial carcinogenicity (Barry et al. 2013). In particular, the 
concentrations of perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) and 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), the most widely studied 
members of PFCs, obtained from the serum of the U.S. and 
Chinese adults were 4.99, 1.94 ng/mL and 5.2, 4.1 ng/mL, 
respectively (Zhang et al. 2019), which indicated that the 
level of PFOA exposed in drinking water in Chinese popu­
lation was significantly higher than that in American coun­
tries. This reveals that there are various sources of PFCs 
exposure in China, including surface water and soil (Liu et 
al. 2020; Gao et al. 2015). Currently, PFCs are considered to 
be a potential safety hazard that seriously threatens the eco­
logical environment and human health due to their extreme 
chemical stability, widespread existence in the environment 
and high accumulation via food chains in organisms. There­
fore, it is necessary to take measures to degrade PFCs in the 
environment for the prevention of harm to human beings. 
Currently, there are chemical (Yang et al. 2020; Deng et al. 
2021), physical (Jovicic et al. 2018; Kim et al. 2020; Tang et 
al. 2021) and biological (Roesch et al. 2020) methods for the 
decontamination of PFCs. In particular, most of the research 
Introduction
Perfluorinated compounds (PFCs) are a class of persistent 
organic pollutants with widespread distribution in the envi­
ronment. They consist of 4 to 14 carbon atoms in the form 
of alkyl chains as the basic skeleton, wherein all hydrogen 
atoms are replaced by fluorine atoms along with various 
functional groups (Gebbink and Letcher 2012). Due to the 
good characteristics on surface activity, chemical stability, 
hydrophobicity and oleophobicity, PFCs are widely used 
in the industrial production, daily necessities, food contact 
materials and other fields (Wu et al. 2012). However, studies 
have shown that PFCs have adverse effects, including liver 
toxicity (Sakr et al. 2007), immunotoxicity (Grandjean et al. 
	
 Junli Wang
wjlrjg@126.com
1	
School of Public Health, Key Laboratory of Environmental 
Pollution Monitoring and Disease Control, Ministry of 
Education, Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, Guizhou, 
China
2	
Engineering Research Center of Food Nutrition and Health, 
Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, Guizhou, China
Abstract
Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) belongs to the class of persistent organic pollutants widely distributed in the environment, 
and has the characteristics of high bioaccumulation and refractory degradation in organisms. To date, there are limited 
reports on the microbial degradation of PFOA. In this pursuit, the present study envisaged the screening of microbes 
capable of degrading PFOA from the soils of eight sites in Huaxi district of Guizhou province, China, using the enrichment 
culture. Sixteen bacterial isolates were obtained in total, and their growth curves were found to be unimodal or bimodal 
in PFOA-spiked MSM cultural solutions. Five isolates of them, viz. 4-a, 5-b, 6-a, 7-c and 8-a, were further selected for 
in-depth study of PFOA degradation, and it was found that all of isolates could increase the concentrations of fluoride ions 
in the cultural solutions. The five PFOA-degrading bacteria were identified as Pseudomonas sp. Obtained Pseudomonas 
resources would contribute to the studies on the degradation of PFOA by the facultative anaerobes.
Keywords  Pseudomonas · Perfluorooctanoic acid · Defluorination · Fluoride ions
Received: 20 November 2023 / Accepted: 21 February 2024 / Published online: 21 May 2024
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Plant Science and Biodiversity Centre, Slovak Academy of Sciences (SAS), Institute of Zoology, Slovak 
Academy of Sciences (SAS), Institute of Molecular Biology, Slovak Academy of Sciences (SAS) 2024
Preliminary study on isolation and characterization of bacteria with 
defluorination towards perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA)
Jianguo Ren1
 · Yuanjin Mao1 · Junli Wang1,2
1 3

## Page 2

Biologia (2024) 79:1909–1918
on PFOA removal and degradation is still in the laboratory 
stage, and the technologies to remove nearly 100% PFOA 
mainly include electrocoagulation processes that are com­
pensated with energy consumption (Lin et al. 2015; Liu et al. 
2018), adsorption/desorption combined with photocatalytic 
reduction processes (Ren et al. 2023), foam/ozone fraction­
ation processes with the aid of cationic surfactant (C8TAB) 
(Li et al. 2021), Hydrochar/KI/UV process (Hu et al. 2023), 
nano-MgAl2O4@CNTs composite materials (Yin et al. 
2023), anion exchange resins (Parvin et al. 2023), ultrasonic 
pyrolysis (Xiong et al. 2023), MDPL(microwave discharge 
plasma in liquid) technique (Sun et al. 2023), UV/Fe(III)-sat­
urated montmorillonite system (Zhang et al. 2023), EO-UV 
and persulfate electrolytes (Uwayezu et al. 2023), etc. Other 
methods developed to degrade PFOA involve bioremedia­
tion of Ensifer adhaerens (Chetverikov and Loginov 2019), 
Acidimicrobium sp. (Huang and Jaffé 2019), microbial con­
sortia (Beškoski et al. 2018) and microbial laccase (Luo 
et al. 2018), and chemical oxidation aided by microwave 
irradiation (Liu et al. 2020) and heat (Lee et al. 2010), and 
chemical reduction with Mg-aminoclay coated nonoscale 
zero valent iron (Arvaniti et al. 2015) and titanium(III) 
citrate with vitamin B12 and Cu0 (Lee et al. 2017), and the 
combination of oxidation and reduction (Liu et al. 2021; 
Han et al. 2023). However, owing to the low effectiveness 
of these technologies (Dombrowski et al. 2018), a number 
of advanced oxidation/reduction processes were designed 
to efficiently degrade polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), 
especially PFOA with a 90 − 100% degradation efficiency 
using mechanochemical process (Zhang et al. 2013; Wang 
et al. 2019), 58.6% defluorination by electrochemical pro­
cess (Garcia-Costa et al. 2020), 97.2 − 100% defluorination 
by sonochemical treatment (Lei et al. 2020; Phan Thi et al. 
2014), 100% mineralization using Gamma ray with a 60Co 
source (Zhang et al. 2014), over 93.3% defluorination using 
eBeam with the suitable dose of nitrate, alkalinity or fulvic 
acid (Wang et al. 2016), 71% and 93% − 100% degrada­
tion efficiency using pulsed corona discharge plasma (Zhan 
et al. 2020) and photochemical reaction (Liu et al. 2013; 
Phan Thi et al. 2013; Tenorio et al. 2020) respectively and a 
maximum degradation of 100% using photocatalysis based 
on different photocatalytic materials (Park et al. 2018; Wu 
et al. 2018; Do et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022). Collated with 
chemical and physical degradation, bioremediation can be 
a green, low-cost and environmentally friendly method 
for PFOA degradation with no stringent reaction condi­
tions and energy input (Leung et al. 2022); However, it is 
a time-consuming process and offers low decomposition 
efficiency. Most of the previous studies associated with the 
bioremediation of PFCs focused on the conversion of PFCs 
to PFOA or PFOS, and paid a less attention on the further 
defluorination degradation of PFOA and PFOS (Roesch 
et al. 2020; Dinglasan et al. 2004). Only during the past 
decade, some researches concentrated on the biodegrada­
tion of PFOA with the aid of specific aerobic, anaerobic 
microbes, and microbial consortia through different action 
mechanisms. Of those, the mechanism of reductive defluo­
riantion of PFOA by the anaerobic Acidimicrobium sp. A6 
was found to be undergoing the coupling of the ammonium 
oxidation and iron reduction involving in Feammox process 
under the anaerobic condition (Huang and Jaffé 2019; Sima 
et al. 2023). However, the results of Liou et al. (Liou et al. 
2010) on the biodegradation and transformation of PFOA 
by five different anaerobic microbial communities from 
the municipal wastewater treatment plant, industrial site 
sediment, agricultural soil, and soils from two fire training 
areas showed that PFOA was biologically inactive under all 
the examined conditions. For the aerobic microbial com­
munities, Harris et al. (Harris et al. 2022) speculated that 
dehalogenase enzymes from Delftia acidovorans could be 
responsible in the degradation and defluorination of PFOA. 
The results of Chetverikov and Loginov (Chetverikov and 
Loginov 2019) indicated that, during 4 days of incubation of 
Ensifer adhaerens, the decarboxylation of PFOA occurred 
with the release of fluoride ions. The decrease of PFOA con­
centration and the appearance of new metabolites monitored 
by LC/MS in the media confirmed the existence of reductive 
defluorination for microbial consortia (Beškoski et al. 2018). 
In the present study, PFOA was used as the substrate to 
screen the microbial resources capable of degrading PFOA 
through enrichment culture of soil suspension. The acquisi­
tion of dominant microorganisms can open new avenues for 
a complete degradation of PFOA in the environment.
Materials and methods
Collection of soil samples
Sample sites have been a National Urban Wetland Park 
now, which were a densely populated area about 15 years 
ago. To verify the feasibility of isolating PFOA degrad­
able microbial strains from the sludge soil commonly 
reported by previous studies (Huang and Jaffé 2018; Li et 
al. 2017), eight samples of soils (Table 1) were collected 
from sludge (#4 ∼ 8) and beneath the earth surface (#1 ∼ 3) 
from 8 sites of Huaxi district, Guiyang city, Guizhou prov­
ince of China. Specifically, the samples were obtained from: 
#1-the meadow of Guizhou Light Industry Technical Col­
lege, #2-the meadow of Guizhou Normal University, #3-the 
hill of Guizhou Medical University, #4-the pond of Guizhou 
Medical University, #5-the sludge of Ten-mile Beach, 
#6-the sludge of Huaxi Park, #7-the upstream sludge and 
#8-the downstream sludge of Huaxi River (as illustrated in 
1 3
1910

## Page 3

Biologia (2024) 79:1909–1918
Fig. 1). The physico-chemical characteristics of respective 
soils were determined by conventional laboratory methods 
(Bao 2008) (Table 1).
Reagents, cultural media and culture conditions
PFOA (AR, 96%) was purchased from Macklin (Shanghai, 
China). Fluorine ion standard solution (10,000 μg/mL) was 
purchased from Guangzhou Sopo Biological Technology 
Co., LTD. Luria-Bertani cultural medium (LB) was com­
posed of 10.0  g sodium chloride, 10.0  g tryptone, 5.0  g 
yeast extract and 15.0 g agar in 1 L of purified water. Basic 
salt cultural medium (MSM) comprised 1.0  g NH4NO3, 
1.5 g K2HPO4, 0.5 g KH2PO4, 0.2 g MgSO4, 1.0 g NaCl 
and 1.0 mL trace elements solution in 1 L of purified water 
without or with agar (15.0  g). The composition of trace 
elements solution (1 L) was following: 0.13 g MnSO4·H2O, 
0.23  g ZnCl2, 0.03  g CuSO4·H2O, 0.42  g CoCl2·6H2O, 
0.15 g Na2MoO4·2H2O, 0.05 g AlCl3·6H2O. All the bacte­
rial strains isolated were cultured on LB or MSM agar on 
90 mm petri dishes at 28℃. For the shaking-flask culture of 
bacterial isolates, rotation rate of 120 rpm and constant tem­
perature of 28 ℃ was employed in the whole experiment.
Preparation of inoculum
1.0 g of fresh soil samples, respectively, from eight sites 
was poured into a 250 mL flask containing 100 mL steril­
ized water and shaked at rotation rate of 120 rpm for half an 
hour, and the soil suspensions obtained after the deposition 
of 10 min were used as the inocula for the degrading trials 
of PFOA.
Table 1  Physico-chemical characteristics of soils obtained from different sites
Code of soil samples
Parameters
pH
Total nitrogen 
(%)
Organic matter 
(%)
Hydrolysable Nitro­
gen (mg/kg)
Available phosphorus 
(mg/kg)
Available 
potassium(mg/
kg)
#1
6.49
0.23
3.81
125.31
3.25
139.80
#2
6.40
0.26
3.74
122.44
2.59
150.60
#3
6.81
0.11
2.13
112.63
1.30
94.33
#4
6.37
0.63
8.94
253.71
20.15
105.30
#5
6.02
0.85
11.26
211.37
18.82
86.20
#6
6.24
0.86
12.86
246.82
22.49
90.41
#7
6.34
0.88
14.18
281.31
25.30
80.22
#8
6.23
0.93
14.62
295.27
26.13
76.31
Fig. 1  Sample sites of soils 
from Huaxi district, Guiyang 
city, Guizhou province of China 
(Visualized by Goolge Earth Pro 
developed by Google)
 
1 3
1911

## Page 4

Biologia (2024) 79:1909–1918
strain. The determination of fluoride by ion-selective elec­
trode (ISE) method was referred from the ‘National Stan­
dards of People’s Republic of China’ (GB/T 5750.5 − 2006) 
(National Standards of People’s Republic of China 2007) 
and the method of Harris et al. (Harris et al. 2022) with 
some modification. Quality control of this detection method 
was monitored with recovery analysis. Standard fluoride 
solutions of 0.02, 0.05, 0.10, 0.20, 0.30 and 0.50 g/mL were 
prepared by dilution of a commercial 10,000 μg/mL fluo­
ride stock solution (Fluoride Standard Cat. No. BW2008110000-50 Tanmo Quality Inspection Technology Co., Ltd.). 
The mixed solutions of 45 mL of fluoride standard and 5 
mL of total ionic strength adjustment buffer(sodium citrate 
114 g/L, citric acid 12 g/L, pH 5.0 ∼ 7.0) were used to deter­
mine electrode potentials with pH meter (Shanghai INESA 
Scientific Instrument Co., Ltd., China; Model: PHS-3  C) 
equipped with indicator electrode-fluoride ion-selective 
electrode (Shanghai INESA Scientific Instrument Co., 
Ltd., China; Model: PF-2-01) and reference electrode was 
a mercurous chloride electrode (Shanghai INESA Scien­
tific Instrument Co., Ltd., China; Model:232). A calibration 
curve of electrode potential slope was constructed using 
solutions containing fluoride at 0.018, 0.045, 0.090, 0.180, 
0.270, 0.450 μg/mL. For the fluoride determination of the 
suspension culture for each strain, the same procedure was 
performed on the filtrate as that of the standards.
Identification of bacteria degrading PFOA
The bacterial strains degrading PFOA were cultured on LB 
plates at 28 ℃ for 120 hours, and the cultural characteristics 
for each strain on LB were observed. Gram reactions, spore 
staining, oxygen requirement, catalase, oxidase, starch 
hydrolysis, Voges-Proskauer test, denitrification, and the 
utilization of carbons and etc. were done according to the 
conventional methods (Holt et al. 1994; Dong et al. 2001). 
The 16S rRNA gene was amplified from chromosomal 
DNA using the universal bacterial primer set, 27F (5’-​A​G​
A​G​T​T​T​G​A​T​C​C​T​G​G​C​T​C​A​G-3’) and 1492R (5’-​T​A​C​G​A​C​
T​T​A​A​C​C​C​C​A​A​T​C​G​C-3’). The purified PCR product was 
sequenced by Sangon Biotech, China. A full sequence of 
the 16 S rRNA gene was compiled with online tools (https://
novopro.cn/tools/combine_fasta.html). The 16 S rRNA gene 
sequences of related taxa were obtained from the GenBank. 
Multiple alignments were performed with the CLUSTAL 
X program. Evolutionary distances were calculated using 
the Kimura two-parameter model and the phylogenetic tree 
constructed via the neighbor-joining method in the MEGA 
5.05 program. Bootstrap analysis with 1,000 replicates was 
also conducted to obtain confidence levels for the branches.
Enrichment culture of bacteria degrading PFOA
100 μL of each soil suspension was added to a 500 mL 
flask containing 100 mL of MSM culture solution, and 
1000 mg/L PFOA concentration. Addition of equal volume 
of inactivated soil suspension was regarded as the control. 
The shaking-flask culture was carried out according to the 
conditions as mentioned above for the enrichment culture 
of specific bacteria degrading the PFOA. The turbidity for 
the suspension cultures of the eight different origins of soils 
was observed by naked eyes for 28 consecutive days at the 
interval of seven days.
Purification of bacteria degrading PFOA
100 μL of each enrichment cultural solution was diluted in 1 
mL of sterile water, and 10 μL of this diluted bacterial sus­
pension was plated on MSM agar with PFOA of 1000 mg/L 
in each of three 90 mm petri dishes. Plates were incubated 
at 28 ℃ for 7 days, and every single colony appearing on 
PFOA-added agar medium was picked up with sterile trans­
fer loop and transferred on LB plates. The plates were incu­
bated for two days at 28 ℃. The morphological uniform of 
each bacterial colony on LB plates was checked visually for 
obtaining purified bacterial strains. The purified strains were 
preserved in a glycerol solution (20% v/v at -70 ℃) for the 
further analysis of PFOA degradation.
Verification of bacterial utilization of PFOA
The purified strain was activated on LB plates, and bacterial 
lawn was scraped off from the agar medium by a transfer 
loop to obtain a loopful of bacteria, which were inoculated 
into a 500 mL flask containing 100 mL of MSM culture solu­
tion with 1000 mg/L of PFOA assayed using previous study 
(Chetverikov and Loginov 2019). A loopful of inactivated 
bacteria was added into the flasks as control (CK). The con­
ditions of the shaking-flask culture for bacterial strains were 
indicated according to the previous description in Sect. 2 of 
Materials and methods. Cell densities of different cultural 
suspensions were measured by microplate reader (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific Inc., 1510) at 600 nm for five consecutive 
days at the interval of 24 h. Each strain was triplicate.
Five strains selected were further used to test the degrad­
ing efficacies towards PFOA. After 31 days of shaking 
culture as mentioned above, the bacterial suspension was fil­
tered (0.22 μm, Ybo Technologies Co., Ltd.), and the filtrate 
collected was used to measure the fluoride ion concentration 
in the cultural suspension. To expel the possible effects of 
the impurities of reagents on the determination of fluoride 
ion, the MSM culture solution of non-replenished PFOA 
was also prepared concurrently for the inoculation of each 
1 3
1912

## Page 5

Biologia (2024) 79:1909–1918
and 7-c from #7, and 8-a, 8-b and 8-b2 from #8. Addition­
ally, the diameter of all the colonies formed on PFOA-added 
MSM agar plate was nearly 2 millimeters, when incubated 
at 28℃ for 7 days.
Utilization and degradation of PFOA by isolated 
bacteria
The growth dynamics of sixteen bacterial strains for the 
utilization of PFOA as sole carbon and energy source 
showed that there existed two growth peaks of different 
intensities for 4-a at 24 and 72 h respectively and 6-a, 6-d2, 
6-d1, 7-b2, 7-c and 6-a1 at 24 and 96 h consistently. On the 
other hand, only one peak was evident for 5-b and 6-c2 at 
24 h, for 8-b, 8-a and 2-b1 at 48 h, for 7-a at 72 h, for 4-b 
and 2-a at 96 h, for 8-b2 at 120 h, respectively during the 
whole incubation time (Fig. 2). Additionally, all the isolated 
bacterial strains exhibited different dynamic tendencies 
of growth during the incubation, which indicated the dif­
ferential modes of utilization towards PFOA. Meanwhile, 
the drop on the absorbance at 600 nm meant the inhibition 
of some toxic intermediates and fluoride ions from bacte­
rial metabolism of PFOA towards the isolates. Considering 
the origin of strains and limited facilities for shaking cul­
ture, five bacterial strains (Fig. S1), viz. 4-a, 5-b, 6-a, 7-c 
and 8-a isolated from different sites were used to test the 
degrading ability towards PFOA in the present study. The 
limit of detection of ISE method was 0.019 μg/mL, and a 
recovery range of 97.8–106.4% was achieved. A calibration 
line for fluoride (Fig. S2) was plotted for the calculation 
of the concentration of fluoride ions in the culture filtrates 
of five bacterial strains. After 31 days incubation for five 
bacterial strains, the concentration of fluoride ions in cul­
ture filtrates was determined (Fig.  3), which indicated a 
low defluorination efficiency of PFOA (1000 mg/L) among 
the five isolated strains. The concentration of fluoride ions 
among the filtrates of different bacteria was significantly 
different (Fig.  3), and the order of fluoride ion was: 6-a 
(0.363 μg/mL) > 7-c (0.347 μg/mL) > 4-a (0.322 μg/mL) 
> 5-b (0.282 μg/mL) ≈ 8-a (0.282 μg/mL). The concentra­
tion of fluoride ions in the filtrates of PFOA-supplemented 
bacterial cultures was significantly higher than those in the 
control (PFOA-supplemented MSM cultures with the inoc­
ulation of inactivated bacteria) and non-replenished PFOA 
bacterial cultures (negligible amounts below the detection 
limit) in the present experiment.
Cultural, biochemical characteristics and 
phylogenetic analysis for five bacterial strains
The photographs of five bacterial strains incubated for 7 
days at 28℃ on LB plates are shown in Fig. 3. All colonies 
Nucleotide sequence accession number
The NCBI GenBank/EMBL/DDBJ accession numbers for 
16 S rRNA gene sequences of strains 4-a, 5-b, 6-a, 7-c and 
8-a were ON533612, ON533613, ON533614, ON533615 
and ON533616 respectively.
Statistical analysis
Analysis of variance using one-way ANOVA was car­
ried out, and the analyses of significance were performed 
by Duncan’s multiple-range test at a significance level of 
p = 0.05 using SAS 8.1 for Windows 7.
Results
Enrichment culture of soil suspensions and 
acquisition of bacterial strains degrading PFOA
Results of shaking-flask culture showed that the bacterial 
strains were present that degraded PFOA in six locations, 
except at two sites, including the meadow of Guizhou Insti­
tute of Light Industry (site 1) and the hill of Guizhou Medical 
University (site 3). The results indicated the organic-matterrich soils sustained the growth of various types of functional 
bacteria (Table 1). The soils of #1 and #3 did not cause a 
visible turbidity of MSM cultural solutions having PFOA, 
and were similar to that of the control after an incubation 
of 28 days. Although the phenomena of turbidity occurred 
in the cultural solutions #2 and #4 ∼ 8, the degree of turbid­
ity for them did not intensify with time (Table 2). After a 
continuum of selective culture on MSM agar with PFOA 
(1000  mg/L) and purified culture on LB in Petri dishes, 
a total of 16 bacterial strains were obtained from the soil 
samples #2 and #4 ∼ 8. Among them, strains of 2-a and 2-b1 
were obtained from the sample #2, 4-a and 4-b from #4, 5-b 
from #5, 6-a1, 6-a, 6-c2, 6-d2 and 6-d1 from #6, 7-a, 7-b2 
Table 2  Turbidity of PFOA-supplemented MSM cultural solutions of 
different soil origins
Code of original soil samples
Days of culture(d)
7
14
21
28
#1
-
-
-
-
#2
+
+
+
+
#3
-
-
-
-
#4
++
++
++
++
#5
+
+
+
+
#6
+
+
+
+
#7
+
+
+
+
#8
++
++
++
++
Noted: ++ indicates apparent turbidity observed in cultural solu­
tions; + indicates slightly turbidity in cultural solutions; - indicates 
no visible turbidity in cultural solutions
1 3
1913

## Page 6

Biologia (2024) 79:1909–1918
glucose, L-lysine and L-tryptophan; negative on growth at 
4℃, Voges-Proskauer test and starch hydrolysis for all the 
strains, and differential reactions on utilization of trehalose, 
sucrose, D-ribose, mannitol, m-inositol, D-xylose, tartrate 
and L-valine indicated the genomic heterogeneity in genus 
Pseudomonas. The phylogenetic tree (Fig. 4) derived from 
16 S rRNA gene sequences was constructed by the neigh­
bor-joining method to clarify the relative position of the 
five bacterial strains with other Pseudomonas species with 
greater than 99.0% 16 S rRNA gene sequence identity. Col­
lectively, it was difficult to conclude the accurate taxonomic 
statuses of the five bacterial strains according to the existing 
references except for the affirmation of genus Pseudomo­
nas. Therefore, the whole-genome sequencing of five bacte­
rial genomes needs to be done to determine its taxonomy.
Discussion
PFOA is an emerging persistent organic pollutant, which 
is difficult to degrade using conventional methods, owing 
to its stable physical and chemical properties. Consider­
ing the decontamination of dominant PFOA and PFOS, 
several emerging technologies for PFOA/PFOS degrada­
tion and removal are reported in the literature (Leung et al. 
2022). Although a low defluorination efficiency of PFOA 
was reported (Leung et al. 2022), bioremediation can lead 
to a permanent dispose of chemicals and is a relatively 
of five bacterial isolates appeared translucent to yellow, 
circular in shape, convex in elevation, and regular in mar­
gin and motility. They were short, non-spore-forming and 
gram-negative bacilli. The results of physiological and bio­
chemical tests on five bacterial strains are listed in Table 3, 
positive on growth at 41℃, oxygen requirement, fluores­
cent, catalase, oxidase reaction, denitrification, utilization of 
Fig. 3  Quantity of fluoride ions produced in the cultural suspensions 
by the degradation of bacterial strains towards PFOA during the incu­
bation period of 31 days. Different letters (a, b, c or d) above the col­
umns indicate statistically significant differences among bacterial cul­
ture filtrates (mean ± SD, N = 3)
 
Fig. 2  Growth dynamics of 
isolated bacterial strains in MSM 
cultural solutions with PFOA 
(1000 mg/L)
 
1 3
1914

## Page 7

Biologia (2024) 79:1909–1918
widely distributed pollutants in the environment. Therefore, 
it is still an important aspect to explore the microorgan­
isms existing in nature that can degrade PFOA, especially 
in sludge (Chiavola et al. 2020). Monitoring fluoride ion 
generation using ion-selective electrodes is a quick method 
to assess the extent of defluorination, which is a critical 
step of organofluorine biodegradation by microbial strains 
(Amorim et al. 2014; Moreira et al. 2014). Currently, only a 
very few of microbial strains identified have been reported 
in the literature for the degradation of PFOA, which include 
Ensifer adhaerens (Chetverikov and Loginov 2019), Acidi­
microbium sp. (Huang and Jaffé 2019; Ruiz-Urigüen et al. 
2022; Huang et al. 2022), Pseudomonas parafulva (Yi et al. 
2016), Delftia acidovorans (Harris et al. 2022), Pseudomo­
nas plecoglossicida (Chetverikov and Sharipov 2022), etc. 
In terms of the results of these studies, different degrading 
mechanisms towards PFOA were embodied on the reductive 
defluorination for anaerobic Acidimicrobium sp. (Huang 
and Jaffé 2019) and the enzymatic processes in aerobic 
Delftia acidovorans (Harris et al. 2022). Our experimental 
results on the defluorination of the isolates towards PFOA 
were consistent with the PFOA degrading effects of Ensi­
fer adhaerens (Chetverikov and Loginov 2019) and Delf­
tia acidovorans (Harris et al. 2022) based on the changes 
of fluoride ion concentrations in cultural medium. Among 
the five isolates of facultative anaerobic Pseudomonas sp. 
focused in this study, a single growth peak appeared in the 
inexpensive choice for eliminating low concentrations of 
Table 3  Physiological and biochemical characteristics of five bacterial 
strains selected
Characteristic
4-a
5-b
6-a
7-c
8-a
Growth at 4℃
-
-
-
-
-
Growth at 41℃
+
+
+
+
+
Oxygen requirement
+*
+*
+*
+*
+*
Fluorescent
+
+
+
+
+
Voges-Proskauer test
-
-
-
-
-
Catalase
+
+
+
+
+
Starch hydrolysis
-
-
-
-
-
Oxidase reaction
+
+
+
+
+
Denitrification
+
+
+
+
+
Utilization of
  Glucose
+
+
+
+
+
  Trehalose
+
+
-
-
+
  Sucrose
+
-
+
+
-
  L-Lysine
+
+
+
+
+
  D-Ribose
-
+
+
+
-
  Mannitol
+
+
+
-
+
  m-Inositol
+
+
-
+
-
  D-Xylose
-
+
-
+
+
  Tartrate
+
-
+
+
+
  L-Tryptophan
+
+
+
+
+
  L-Valine
+
+
-
+
+
Noted: +, 90% or more strains are positive; -, 90% or more strains are 
negative; +*, facultative anaerobes
Fig. 4  The phylogenetic tree 
based on 16 S rRNA gene 
sequence with neigh-bour-joining 
method. Bar, 0.02 substitution per 
nucleotide position
 
1 3
1915

## Page 8

Biologia (2024) 79:1909–1918
Supplementary 
Information  The 
online 
version 
contains 
supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1007/s11756024-01654-0.
Acknowledgements  Authors are grateful to Senior experimentalist 
Jun Teng for the support of research facilities.
Funding  This work was supported by the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (NSFC) (31960265).
Declarations
Conflict of interest  The authors declare that they have no conflict of 
interest.
References
Amorim CL, Moreira IS, Maia AS et al (2014) Biodegradation of 
ofloxacin, norfloxacin, and ciprofloxacin as single and mixed sub­
strates by Labrys portucalensis F11. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 
98:3181–3190. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-013-5333-8
Arvaniti OS, Hwang Y, Andersen HR et al (2015) Reductive degrada­
tion of perfluorinated compounds in water using Mg-aminoclay 
coated nanoscale zero valent iron. Chem Eng J 262:133–139. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2014.09.079
Bao SD (2008) Soil agrochemical analysis, 3rd edn. China Agricul­
tural, Beijing, China, pp 25–114
Barry V, Winquist A, Steenland K (2013) Perfluorooctanoic acid 
(PFOA) exposures and incident cancers among adults living near 
a chemical plant. Environ Health Perspect 121(11–12):1313–
1318. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1306615
Beškoski LS, Beškoski VP, Yamamoto K et al (2018) Defluorination 
of perfluoroalkyl acids is followed by production of monofluo­
rinated fatty acids. Sci Total Environ 636:355–359. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.04.243
Chetverikov SP, Loginov ON (2019) A new Ensifer adhaerens 
strain M1 is capable of transformation of perfluorocarbox­
ylic acids. Microbiology 88:115–117. https://doi.org/10.1134/
S0026261718060085
Chetverikov SP, Sharipov DA (2022) Biodegradation of perfluoroocta­
noic acid by Pseudomonas plecoglossicida strain DD4. Baghdad 
Sci J 19:1502–1511. https://doi.org/10.21123/bsj.2022.6825
Chiavola A, Di Marcantonio C, Boni M et al (2020) Experimental 
investigation on the perfluorooctanoic and perfluorooctane sul­
fonic acids fate and behavior in the activated sludge reactor. Pro­
cess Saf Environ Prot 134:406–415. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
psep.2019.11.003
Deng Y, Liang Z, Lu X et al (2021) The degradation mechanisms 
of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctane sul­
fonic acid (PFOS) by different chemical methods: a critical 
review. Chemosphere 283:131168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2021.131168
Dinglasan MJA, Ye Y, Edwards EA et al (2004) Fluorotelomer alcohol 
biodegradation yields poly- and per-fluorinated acids. Environ 
Sci Technol 38:2857–2864. https://doi.org/10.1021/es0350177
Do H-T, Phan Thi L-A, Dao Nguyen NH et al (2020) Tailoring photo­
catalysts and elucidating mechanisms of photocatalytic degrada­
tion of perfluorocarboxylic acids (PFCAs) in water: a comparative 
overview. J Chem Technol Biot 95:2569. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jctb.6333
Dombrowski PM, Kakarla P, Caldicott W et al (2018) Technology 
review and evaluation of different chemical oxidation conditions 
early growth stage for 8-a and 5-b at 48 h and 24 h of incu­
bation respectively, which might hint the main enzymatic 
processes in the degradation of PFOA similar to the function 
of Delftia acidovorans (Harris et al. 2022) under the aero­
bic condition. On the other hand, two growth peaks were 
observed for strain 4-a (24 and 72 h), 7-c (24 and 96 h) and 
6-a (24 and 96 h). This might imply the serial degradation of 
PFOA including enzymatic oxidative metabolism (the early 
growth stage in the aerobic condition) and a reductive metab­
olism under the availability of electron donors– ammonium 
or hydrogen and electron acceptor-NO3
−, MoO4
2−, PFOA 
or by other factors (the late growth stage in the low oxygen 
partial pressure or the anaerobic environment) on PFOA. 
Meanwhile, more experiments are required to validate these 
assumptions. Differential fluoride ion concentration in the 
cultural medium among the five specific isolates verified the 
in-depth defluorination of strain 4-a, 7-c and 6-a surpassing 
8-a and 5-b during the incubation. Especially for the isolate 
7-c, a stable growth tendency occurred during incubation of 
120 h, indicating its strong adaptation mechanisms, such as 
the capacity to modify the cellular membrane to maintain 
their biological functions and/or the use of efflux pumps to 
decrease the concentration of toxics inside the cells. A strik­
ing reduction of growth for strain 4-a, 5-b, 6-a and 8-a at the 
end of the incubation period suggested the potential toxicity 
of metabolic end products of defluorination on the bacteria, 
including known fluoride ions (Chetverikov and Loginov 
2019; Wackett et al. 2022). More research needs to be done 
for the clarification of the differential metabolic pathways 
probably involving in the production of perfluoroheptanoic 
acid, perfluorobutanoic acid, shorter chain perfluorinated 
products, fluoride ions, acetate, et al. among the isolates 
towards PFOA through the genomics, transcriptomics and 
proteomics methods.
Conclusion
In conclusion, this present study illustrated the biodegra­
dation of PFOA by some bacterial strains from the sludge 
soils. Unimodal or bimodal growth dynamics for the isolates 
with PFOA as the sole carbon and energy source indicated 
the differences in the mechanism of PFOA biodegradation. 
Five bacterial isolates of them, namely 4-a, 5-b, 6-a, 7-c and 
8-a exhibiting the differential defluorination towards PFOA 
were identified as Pseudomonas sp. based on the cultural 
and biochemical characteristics, 16 S rRNA sequences and 
phylogenetic analysis. Nonetheless, this study can be ben­
eficial for researchers to deepen their understanding of the 
defluorination of facultative anaerobic bacteria towards 
PFOA.
1 3
1916

## Page 9

Biologia (2024) 79:1909–1918
iron-activated persulfate oxidation. Water Res 44:886–892. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2009.09.055
Lee Y-C, Chen Y-P, Chen M-J et al (2017) Reductive defluorination of 
perfluorooctanoic acid by titanium(III) citrate with vitamin B12 
and copper nanoparticles. J Hazard Mater 340:336. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2017.06.020
Lei Y-J, Tian Y, Sobhani Z et al (2020) Synergistic degradation of 
PFAS in water and soil by dual-frequency ultrasonic activated 
persulfate. Chem Eng J 388:124215. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2020.124215
Leter G, Consales C, Eleuteri P et al (2014) Exposure to perfluoro­
alkyl substances and sperm DNA global methylation in Arctic 
and European populations. Environ Mol Mutagen 55:591–600. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/em.21874
Leung SCE, Shukla P, Chen DC et al (2022) Emerging technologies for 
PFOS/PFOA degradation and removal: a review. Sci Total Envi­
ron 827:153669. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.153669
Li L, Wang TY, Sun YJ et al (2017) Identify biosorption effects of 
Thiobacillus towards perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA): pilot study 
from field to laboratory. Chemosphere 171:31–39. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2016.12.039
Li Y-F, Chien W-Y, Liu Y-J et al (2021) Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) 
removal by flotation with cationic surfactants. Chemosphere 
266:128949. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.128949
Lin C-Y, Wen L-L, Lin LY et al (2013) The associations between serum 
perfluorinated chemicals and thyroid function in adolescents and 
young adults. J Hazard Mater 244–245:637–644. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2012.10.049
Lin H, Wang Y, Niu J et al (2015) Efficient sorption and removal of 
perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs) from aqueous solution by metal 
hydroxides generated in situ by electrocoagulation. Environ 
Sci 
Technol 
49:10562–10569. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
est.5b02092
Liou JS-C, Szostek B, DeRito CM et al (2010) Investigating the biode­
gradability of perfluorooctanoic acid. Chemosphere 80:176–183. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2010.03.009
Liu DD, Xiu ZM, Liu F et al (2013) Perfluorooctanoic acid degradation 
in the presence of Fe (III) under natural sunlight. J Hazard Mater 
262:456–463. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2013.09.001
Liu Y, Hu X-M, Zhao Y et al (2018) Removal of perfluorooctanoic acid 
in simulated and natural waters with different electrode materials 
by electrocoagulation. Chemosphere 201:303–309. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2018.02.129
Liu F, Hua L, Zhang W (2020) Influences of microwave irradiation on 
performances of membrane filtration and catalytic degradation of 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA). Environ Int 143:105969. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.105969
Liu BL, Zhang H, Yu Y et al (2020) Perfluorinated compounds (PFCs) 
in soil of the Pearl River Delta, China: spatial distribution, sources, 
and ecological risk assessment. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol 
78:182–189. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00244-019-00674-1
Liu Z, Bentel MJ, Yu Y et al (2021) Near-quantitative defluorination 
of perfluorinated and fluorotelomer carboxylates and sulfonates 
with integrated oxidation and reduction. Environ Sci Technol 
55:7052–7062. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c00353
Liu XQ, Duan XG, Bao T et al (2022) High-performance photocata­
lytic decomposition of PFOA by BiOX/TiO2 heterojunctions: selfinduced inner electric fields and band alignment. J Hazard Mater 
430:128195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.128195
Luo Q, Liang S, Huang Q (2018) Laccase induced degradation of per­
fluorooctanoic acid in a soil slurry. J Hazard Mater 359:241–247. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2018.07.048
Moreira IS, Ribeiro AR, Afonso CM et al (2014) Enantioselec­
tive biodegradation of fluoxetine by the bacterial strain Labrys 
portucalensis F11. Chemosphere 111:103–111. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.03.022
on treatability of PFAS. Remediation 28:135–150. https://doi.
org/10.1002/rem.21555
Dong XZ, Cai MY (2001) Manual of systematic identification of com­
mon bacteria. Science, Beijing, China, pp 348–392
Gallo V, Leonardi G, Brayne C et al (2013) Serum perfluoroalkyl 
acids concentrations and memory impairment in a large crosssectional study. BMJ Open 3:e002414. https://doi.org/10.1136/
bmjopen-2012-002414
Gao Y, Fu JJ, Meng M et al (2015) Spatial distribution and fate of 
perfluoroalkyl substances in sediments from the Pearl River Estu­
ary, South China. Mar Pollut Bull 96(1–2):226–234. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2015.05.022
Garcia-Costa AL, Savall A, Zazo JA et al (2020) On the role of the 
cathode for the electro-oxidation of perfluorooctanoic acid. Cata­
lysts 10:902. https://doi.org/10.3390/catal10080902
Gebbink WA, Letcher RJ (2012) Comparative tissue and body 
compartment accumulation and maternal transfer to eggs of 
perfluoroalkyl sulfonates and carboxylates in Great Lakes her­
ring gulls. Environ Poll 162:40–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envpol.2011.10.011
Grandjean P, Andersen EW, Budtz-Jørgensen E et al (2012) Serum 
vaccine antibody concentrations in children exposed to perfluori­
nated compounds. JAMA 307:391–397. https://doi.org/10.1001/
jama.2011.2034
Halldorsson TI, Rytter D, Haug LS et al (2012) Prenatal exposure to 
perfluorooctanoate and risk of overweight at 20 years of age: a 
prospective cohort study. Environ Health Perspect 120:668–673. 
https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1104034
Han JY, Zhao MX, Wu KQ et al (2023) A bifunctional single-atom 
catalyst assisted by Fe2O3 for efficiently electrocatalytic perfluo­
rooctanoic acid degradation by integrating reductive and oxida­
tive processes. Chem Eng J 470:144270. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2023.144270
Harris JD, Coon CM, Doherty ME et al (2022) Engineering and char­
acterization of dehalogenase enzymes from Delftia acidovorans 
in bioremediation of perfluorinated compounds. Syn Syst Bio­
technol 7:671–676. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2022.02.005
Holt JG, Krieg NR, Sneath PHA et al (1994) Bergey’s manual of deter­
minative bacteriology, 9th edn. Williams and Wilkins Co., Balti­
more, USA, p 783
Hu Y, Zhan Y, Wei C et al (2023) Hydrochar coupled with iodide for 
efficient photodegradation of perfluorooctanoic acid and perfluo­
rooctane sulfonic acid under ultraviolet light. Sci Total Environ 
868:161621. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.161621
Huang S, Jaffé PR (2018) Isolation and characterization of an ammo­
nium-oxidizing iron reducer: Acidimicrobium sp. A6. PLoS ONE 
13:e0194007. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0194007
Huang S, Jaffé PR (2019) Defluorination of perfluorooctanoic acid 
(PFOA) and perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) by Acidimicro­
bium sp. strain A6. Environ Sci Technol 53:11410–11419. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.9b04047
Huang S, Sima M, Long Y et al (2022) Anaerobic degradation of per­
fluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in biosolids by Acidimicrobium sp. 
strain A6. J Hazard Mater 424:127699. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2021.127699
Jovicic V, Khan MJ, Zbogar-Rasic A et al (2018) Degradation of low 
concentrated perfluorinated compounds (PFCs) from water sam­
ples using non-thermal atmospheric plasma (NTAP). Energies 
11:1290. https://doi.org/10.3390/en11051290
Kim M-K, Kim T, Kim T-K et al (2020) Degradation mechanism 
of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) during electrocoagulation 
using Fe electrode. Sep Purif Technol 247:116911. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.seppur.2020.116911
Lee Y-C, Lo S-L, Chiueh P-T et al (2010) Microwave-hydrother­
mal decomposition of perfluorooctanoic acid in water by 
1 3
1917

## Page 10

Biologia (2024) 79:1909–1918
alkyl substances. Microb Biotechnol 15:773–792. https://doi.
org/10.1111/1751-7915.13928
Wang L, Batchelor B, Pillai SD et al (2016) Electron beam treatment 
for potable water reuse: removal of bromate and perfluorooc­
tanoic acid. Chem Eng J 302:58–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2016.05.034
Wang N, Lv HQ, Zhou YQ et al (2019) Complete defluorination and 
mineralization of perfluorooctanoic acid by a mechanochemi­
cal method using alumina and persulfate. Environ Sci Technol 
53:8302–8313. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.9b00486
Wu YN, Wang YX, Li JG et al (2012) Perfluorinated compounds 
in seafood from coastal areas in China. Environ Int 42:67–71. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2011.04.007
Wu D, Li XK, Zhang JX et al (2018) Efficient PFOA degradation by 
persulfate-assisted photocatalytic ozonation. Sep Purif Technol 
207:255–261. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2018.06.059
Xiong X, ShangY, Bai L et al (2023) Complete defluorination of per­
fluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) by ultrasonic pyrolysis towards zero 
fluoro-pollution. Water Res 235:119829. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2023.119829
Yang L, He LY, Xue JM et al (2020) Persulfate-base degradation of 
perfluorooctanoic acid(PFOA) and perfluorooctane sulfonate 
(PFOS) in aqueous solution: review on influences, mecha­
nisms and prospective. J Hazard Mater 393:122405. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.122405
Yi LB, Chai LY, Xie Y et al (2016) Isolation, identification, and degra­
dation performance of a PFOA-degrading strain. Genet Mol Res 
15:235–246. https://doi.org/10.4238/gmr.15028043
Yin S, López JF, Solís JJC et al (2023) Enhanced adsorption of PFOA 
with nano MgAl2O4@CNTs: influence of pH and dosage, and 
environmental conditions. J Hazard Mater Adv 9:100252. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.hazadv.2023.100252
Zhan JX, Zhang A, Héroux P et al (2020) Remediation of perfluorooc­
tanoic acid (PFOA) polluted soil using pulsed corona discharge 
plasma. J Hazard Mater 387:121688. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2019.121688
Zhang KL, Huang J, Yu G et al (2013) Destruction of perfluorooc­
tane sulfonate (PFOS) and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) by 
ball milling. Environ Sci Technol 47:6471–6477. https://doi.
org/10.1021/es400346n
Zhang Z, Chen J-J, Lyu X-J et al (2014) Complete mineralization of 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) by γ-irradiation in aqueous solu­
tion. Sci Rep 4:7418. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep07418
Zhang SY, Kang QY, Peng H et al (2019) Relationship between per­
fluorooctanoate and perfluorooctane sulfonate blood concen­
trations in the general population and routine drinking water 
exposure. Environ Int 126:54–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envint.2019.02.009
Zhang Y, Wang X, Xu Y et al (2023) Photochemical degradation of 
perfluorooctanoic acid under UV irradiation in the presence of 
Fe(III)-saturated montmorillonite. Sci Total Environ 876:162760. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.162760
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris­
dictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds 
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the 
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted 
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of 
such publishing agreement and applicable law.
National Standards of People’s Republic of China (2007) Stan­
dard examination methods for drinking water-nonmetal 
parame-ters[EB/OL]./2007-07-01.
Park K, Ali I, Kim J-O (2018) Photodegradation of perfluoroocta­
noic acid by grapheme oxide-deposited TiO2 nanotube arrays 
in aqueous phase. J Environ Manag 218:333–339. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.04.016
Parvin S, Hara-Yamamura HH, Kanai Y et al (2023) Important proper­
ties of anion exchange resins for efficient removal of PFOS and 
PFOA from groundwater. Chemosphere 341:139983. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2023.139983
Phan Thi L-A, Do H-T, Lee Y-C et al (2013) Photochemical decom­
position of perfluorooctanoic acids in aqueous carbonate solu­
tion with UV irradiation. Chem Eng J 221:258–263. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2019.121730
Phan Thi L-A, Do H-T, Lo S-L (2014) Enhancing decomposition rate 
of perfluorooctanoic acid by carbonate radical assisted sono­
chemical treatment. Ultrason Sonochem 21:1875–1880. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ultsonch.2014.03.027
Ren Z, Bergmann U, Uwayezu JN et al (2023) Combination of adsorp­
tion/desorption and photocatalytic reduction processes for PFOA 
removal from water by using an aminated biosorbent and a UV/
sulfite system. Environ Res 228:115930. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2023.115930
Roesch P, Vogel C, Simon F-G (2020) Reductive defluorination and 
mechanochemical decomposition of per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFASs): from present knowledge to future remedi­
ation concepts. Int J Environ Res Pub He 17:7242. https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph17197242
Ruiz-Urigüen M, Shuai WT, Huang S et al (2022) Biodegradation of 
PFOA in microbial electrolysis cells by Acidimicrobiaceae sp. 
strain A6. Chemosphere 292:133506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2021.133506
Sakr CJ, Kreckmann KH, Green JW et al (2007) Cross-sectional study 
of lipids and liver enzymes related to a serum biomarker of expo­
sure (ammonium perfluorooctanoate or APFO) as part of a gen­
eral health survey in a cohort of occupationally exposed workers. 
J Occup Environ Med 49:1086–1096. https://doi.org/10.1097/
JOM.0b013e318156eca3
Sima MW, Huang S, Jaffé PR (2023) Modeling the kinetics of per­
fluorooctanoic and perfluorooctane sulfonic acid biodegra­
dation by Acidimicrobium sp. strain A6 during the feammox 
process. J Hazard Mater 448:130903. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2023.130903
Sun S, Sun B, Wang Q et al (2023) Efficient defluorination of PFOA by 
microwave discharge plasma in liquid: influence of actual water 
environment factors. J Water Process Eng 55:104091. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2023.104091
Tang JW, Liu Z, Lu WJ et al (2021) Electrochemical degradation of 
perfluorinated compounds by Ag coated Ti (Ti/Ag) anode: toward 
the electrode preparation, characterization and application. Envi­
ron Sci Water Res Technol 7:455–467. https://doi.org/10.1039/
D0EW00785D
Tenorio R, Liu JY, Xiao X et al (2020) Destruction of per- and poly­
fluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in aqueous film-forming foam 
(AFFF) with UV-sulfite photoreductive treatment. Environ Sci 
Technol 54:6957–6967. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.0c00961
Uwayezu JN, Carabante I, van Hees P et al (2023) Combining elec­
trochemistry and ultraviolet radiation for the degradation of 
per- and poly-fluoroalkyl substances in contaminated groundwa­
ter and wastewater. J Water Process Eng 54:104028. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2023.104028
Wackett LP (2022) Nothing lasts forever: understanding microbial 
biodegradation of polyfluorinated compounds and per-fluorinated 
1 3
1918

