# ssrn-4110870

**Source PDF**: ssrn-4110870.pdf

---

## Page 1

1
1
2
Kinetics of Perfluorooctanoic and Perfluorooctane Sulfonic Acid Biodegradation by 
3
Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 during the Feammox Process 
4
5
Matthew W. Sima, Shan Huang, and Peter R. Jaffé*
6
7
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, 
8
USA.
9
*Corresponding Author Jaffe@Princeton.edu
10
11
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 2

2
12
13
Abstract
14
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are emerging contaminants of concern due to 
15
their health effects and persistence in the environment. Although perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs), 
16
such as perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) are very 
17
difficult to biodegrade because they are completely saturated with fluorine, it has recently been 
18
shown that Acidimicrobium Sp. A6 (A6), which oxidizes ammonium under iron reducing 
19
conditions (Feammox process), can defluorinate PFAAs.  A kinetic model was developed and 
20
tested in this study using laboratory batch incubation experiments to couple the Feammox 
21
process to PFAS defluorination. The experimental results show higher Feammox activity and 
22
PFAS degradation in A6 enrichment cultures than in pure A6 cultures. The coupled experimental 
23
and modeling results show that the PFAS defluorination rate is proportional to the rate of 
24
ammonium oxidation.  The ammonium oxidation rate and the defluorination rate increase 
25
monotonically, but not linearly, with increasing A6 biomass. Given that different batches of A6 
26
cultures have different level of Feammox activity, the parameters required to simulate the 
27
Feammox experiments varied between A6 batches, whereas parameters required to link the 
28
Feammox process to PFAS defluorination remained relatively constant between A6 batches.
29
Keywords:  Feammox, Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6, kinetic modeling, defluorination, PFAS. 
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 3

3
37
Environmental Implication
38
39
There is significant concern about the widespread presence of per and polyfluorinated alkyl 
40
substances (PFAS) in the environment given their associated health concerns.  Perfluorinated 
41
compounds are extremely recalcitrant and have been dubbed “forever chemicals”.    It has 
42
recently been shown that Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 (A6), an anaerobic ammonium oxidizer, 
43
is capable of defluorinating perfluorinated compounds such as PFOA and PFOS.  This research 
44
focuses on linking the kinetics of this defluorination process with the rate of ammonium 
45
oxidation by A6 and the A6 biomass, providing new insights into the factors that drive this 
46
defluorination in systems favoring the growth of A6. 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 4

4
47
1. Introduction
48
Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA) and Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS) are the two most 
49
studied and regulated per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) (Kucharzyk et al., 2017; 
50
Naidu et al., 2020; Teaf et al., 2019; USEPA, 2020). Degradation of PFOA and PFOS under 
51
natural conditions is difficult, especially compared to their precursors (e.g., fluorotelomers), 
52
because their non-functional carbons contain only the C-C and the very strong C-F but no C-H 
53
bonds (Buck et al., 2011; Liu and Avendano, 2013; Sima and Jaffé, 2020; Naidu et al., 2020). 
54
Compared to physical and chemical remediation methods, biological degradation may be more 
55
cost-effective, despite its slow defluorination rate (Ahmed et al., 2020; Naidu et al., 2020; Bolan 
56
et al., 2021; Liu and Avendano, 2013). Under natural soil-water environmental conditions, PFAS 
57
may be transformed or degraded into different shorter chain PFAS or into PFAS with different 
58
functional groups (e.g., carboxylic acid and phosphate esters), all of which are primarily 
59
mediated by microbial activity (Allred et al., 2015; Liu and Liu, 2016; Hamid et al., 2018). In 
60
fact, it is much more common for a particular PFAS to be transformed into shorter carbon chain 
61
products or those with different functional groups via chemical (e.g., hydrolysis) and biological 
62
(aerobic and anaerobic) reactions (Liu and Liu, 2016, Che et al. 2021), than to be fully degraded 
63
to its inorganic components (e.g., CO2, SO42−, and F−) (Huang and Jaffé, 2019).
64
Many microbes such as P. plecoglossicida (Chetverikov et al., 2017), P. parafulva (Yi et 
65
al., 2016), and P. aeruginosa (Kwon et al., 2014) are capable of partially degrading PFAS (Bolan 
66
et al., 2021; Liu and Avendano, 2013). Beskoski et al. (2018) also showed that 
67
chemoorganoheterotrophic bacteria, as well as yeast and molds, could reduce PFOA and PFOS 
68
moderately. Apart from the bacterial composition, environmental factors (pH, Eh, and chemical 
69
composition) are also important to determine the optimal degradation rate of PFAS compounds 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 5

5
70
(Bolan et al., 2021). In general, bacteria diversity was adversely affected by the presence of 
71
PFAS, but some microbes were shown to thrive in PFAS contaminated soils (Senevirathna et al., 
72
2022; Ji et al., 2021). For example, Senevirathna et al. (2022) showed a higher microbial 
73
population of Alphaproteobacteria, Acidobacteria, and Gammaproteobacteria in PFAS 
74
contaminated soils than in the surrounding non-contaminated soils. 
75
Recently, Huang and Jaffé (2019) showed that PFOA and PFOS are degradable in 
76
anaerobic incubations during the Feammox process (ammonium oxidation under iron reduction) 
77
by Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 (referred to as A6 from here on), including in biosolids 
78
augmented with A6 and ferrihydrite (Huang et al., 2022), as well as in bioelectrochemical 
79
reactors (Ruiz et al., 2022), where the anode is the electron acceptor instead of ferric iron. A6 is 
80
an autotroph that thrives in iron rich acidic soils (Huang et al., 2016), which was isolated and 
81
grown as a pure culture by Huang and Jaffé (2018). The Feammox reaction, when ferrihydrite is 
82
the ferric iron source, is written as (Huang and Jaffé, 2018):
83
3Fe2O3•0.5H2O + 10H+ + NH4+  6Fe2+ + 8.5H2O +NO2-                           (1)
84
Results from 100-day incubation experiments (Huang and Jaffé, 2019) showed that 
85
PFOA degraded faster than PFOS, and that incubations with an A6 enrichment culture, as 
86
opposed to a pure A6 culture, resulted in higher PFAS defluorination rates.  Furthermore. 
87
incubations with A6 enrichment cultures, vs. incubations with pure or relatively pure A6 
88
cultures, resulted in the production of higher amounts of shorter carbon chain intermediate PFAS 
89
byproducts (PFBA, PFPeA, PFHxA, and PFHpA from PFOA and PFBS and PFBA from PFOS), 
90
indicating a synergy among microbes present in the enrichment culture and multiple possible 
91
defluorination mechanisms.  Similar results were also found by Ruiz et al. (2022) using 
92
bioelectrochemical reactors seeded with A6. Results by Huang and Jaffé (2019) also showed that 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 6

6
93
the fraction of PFOA and PFOS that was defluorinated over a specific time was independent of 
94
the initial PFAS concentration, which varied over 3 orders of magnitude, indicating, that at least 
95
over the studied concentration range, a first order kinetic with respect to the concentration of the 
96
PFAS compounds is appropriate to describe such defluorination kinetics. It was also shown that 
97
PFAS degradation, at the concentrations studied, had little or no effects on the Feammox process 
98
in terms of NH4+ oxidized (Huang and Jaffé, 2019). It has been hypothesized by Huang and Jaffé 
99
(2019) that A6 can defluorinated PFAS, but being an autotroph, it is unable to break the carbon100
carbon bonds, thus, other heterotrophs present in the enrichment culture will break the carbon101
carbon bond once the carbon atom is no longer fully saturated with fluorine. While the A6 
102
enrichment cultures usually contain about 40% A6 by bacterial numbers, it is exceedingly 
103
difficult to maintain an absolutely pure culture for long term incubations. Many “pure” A6 
104
cultures for which A6 numbers and total bacterial numbers were the same at t = 0, have exhibited 
105
an A6 purity after a month or two of incubation of about 90% or higher.  In such “pure A6 
106
culture” incubations, minor amounts of intermediates have also been detected (Ruiz et al., 2021). 
107
Hence, in this manuscript, the pure A6 culture will refer to an A6 culture with upwards of 90% 
108
purity at the end of the incubations, to differentiate it from the A6 enrichment culture which has 
109
an A6 purity of at most 40% and a much higher presence of various heterotrophs throughout the 
110
whole incubation period (Huang and Jaffé, 2019).
111
The objectives of this study were to gain further insights into the kinetics of PFOA 
112
defluorination by A6 and to develop a simple kinetic model to describe the coupled 
113
Feammox/PFAS defluorination processes. This will be based on results from the study by Huang 
114
and Jaffé (2019) and augmented via incorporation of further experiments that focus on the effect 
115
of A6 biomass on the degradation rate of PFOA, as well as longer-term experiments where 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 7

7
116
NH4+ ,Fe(III), and CO2 are replenished, pH adjusted, and some Fe(II) withdrawn at different 
117
times during the incubation (Jaffé et al., 2021). Insights gained from this effort will aid in 
118
assessing PFAS dynamics at locations where the Feammox process is occurring naturally, and/or 
119
for an eventual design of an A6-based bioremediation process.
120
121
2. Materials and Methods
122
The study consisted of three different sets of experiments, conducted at different times, as 
123
well as supplemental datasets that were used to test the models derived from the three primary 
124
experiments. The goal of the first set of experiments hereafter denoted as Experiment 1 was to 
125
investigate PFOA degradation at different initial PFOA concentrations (0.1, 10, and 100 mg/L) at 
126
the same initial A6 concentration. The goal of the second set of experiments, denoted as 
127
Experiment 2, was to study PFOA degradation (100 mg/L) at different initial A6 concentrations. 
128
The third set of experiments, denoted as Experiment 3, which was not used for modeling 
129
purposes, was designed to study PFOA degradation at a consistent high Feammox reaction rate 
130
by replenishing the medium with highly concentrated NH4+ and Fe(III) solutions at 15-day 
131
intervals to demonstrate the effect of maintaining more ideal growth conditions on the long-term 
132
reaction rates.   The various experiments, and their use in model calibration and testing, which is 
133
described below, is illustrated in Figure 1. 
134
2.1 PFOA degradation for different initial PFOA concentrations (Experiment 1) 
135
To focus on the defluorination kinetics as a function of the initial PFOA concentrations, 
136
experimental results from Huang and Jaffé (2019) as well as results from additional incubations 
137
described below were used.   
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 8

8
138
For all incubations, two hundred milliliters of either a pure A6 culture or an A6 
139
enrichment culture, obtained from a Feammox laboratory-scale continuous-flow membrane 
140
reactor, which has been operated for 180 days, were mixed with 500 mL of an anoxic inorganic 
141
Fe(III)−NH4+ enrichment medium. This medium consisted of 7.5 mM 6-line ferrihydrite 
142
(Fe2O3·0.5H2O prepared according to Cornell and Schwertmann, 2003), 2.81 mM NH4Cl, 0.19 
143
mM (NH4)2SO4, 0.24 mM NaHCO3, 0.71 mM KHCO3, 0.07 mM KH2PO4, 0.41 mM 
144
MgSO4·7H2O, and 0.40 mM CaCl2·2H2O, in addition to 1 mL/L of a trace element solution and 
145
1 mL/L of a vitamin solution (ATCC MD-VS). The mixture of medium and culture was then 
146
shaken in an anaerobic chamber for 24 h prior to the incubations. An electron shuttling 
147
compound necessary for the growth of the pure A6 strain (Huang and Jaffe, 2018), 9,10148
anthraquinone-2,7-disulphonic acid (AQDS), was added to the pure A6 culture to yield a 
149
concentration of 25 μM. These mixtures were evenly distributed into multiple 10 mL serum vials 
150
in an anaerobic chamber and sealed with butyl rubber stoppers. The headspace (3 mL) of each 
151
vial was vacuumed and then flushed with a N2/CO2 (80:20) mixture to achieve anoxic conditions 
152
and provide additional CO2 to the vials for A6 growth. All steps for the inoculation and isolation 
153
were carried out under sterilized conditions (autoclaved vials, and the media filtered through a 
154
0.2 μm membrane). The Eh in the vials was −135 ±17 mV, and the initial pH was 4.5 ± 0.2 and 
155
increased to 5.0 ±0.2 during the incubations.
156
Incubations as described above were conducted by Huang and Jaffé (2109), and 
157
augmented for this research, with initial concentrations of 0.24 μM, 24 μM, and 0.24 mM PFOA, 
158
and 0.20 μM, 20 μM, and 0.20 mM PFOS (equivalent to 0.1 mg/L, 10 mg/L, and 100 mg/L of 
159
PFOA/PFOS). The higher PFOA/PFOS concentrations compared to what is typically found at 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 9

9
160
contaminated sites was selected to allow for more accurate F− analyses, and to possibly evaluate 
161
the effect of defluorination on the reduction of Fe(III). For each set of experiments, several 
162
controls were prepared, including a positive control that was identical to those described above 
163
but without PFOA/PFOS to compare the Feammox activity in the absence of PFAS. All vials 
164
were placed on a rotary shaker at 150 rpm at ambient temperature for the incubations. On days 0, 
165
7, 35, 60, and 100, three vials were destructively sampled for Fe(II), NH4+, PFOA/PFOS, F-, 
166
shorter carbon-chain intermediates, and microbial analyses (A6) as described in detail in Huang 
167
and Jaffé, 2019. 
168
An additional set of incubations with 3 mM of NH4+ and 12 mM of Fe(III) was conducted 
169
for initial PFOA concentrations of 24 μM (10 mg/L) and sampled at 0, 7, 25, and 60 days. 16S, 
170
along with microbial analysis, and concentrations of NH4+, F- and PFOA were monitored for this 
171
set of incubations, while Fe(II) was not measured. This experiment was conducted at a different 
172
time, using a different batch of A6 with different Feammox activity, than the 100 mg/L and 0.1 
173
mg/L experiments (Fig. 1), which will be accounted for in the analyses described below. 
174
2.2 PFOA degradation at different initial A6 concentrations (Experiment 2) 
175
Either the pure A6 culture or the A6 enrichment culture, both of which had been acclimated 
176
to PFOA for 3 months, were mixed with an anoxic inorganic Fe(III)−NH4+ medium, to prepare 
177
batch incubations with initial A6 concentrations of 1.0x104, 1.0x105, 1.0x106, and 1.0x107 
178
copies/mL using the method described in Huang and Jaffé (2018). Then, PFOA was added to the 
179
vials, to yield an initial concentration of 0.24 mM (100 mg/L).  Incubation vials were prepared and 
180
conducted for 30 days at 25°C as described above. Autoclaved controls and controls without PFOA 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 10

10
181
were run in parallel. Triplicate samples were collected destructively for Fe(II), NH4+, and PFOA 
182
analyses on day 0, 5, 15, and 30, and A6 biomass was measured for day 0. 
183
2.3 PFOA degradation during NH4+ and ferrihydrite replenishment experiments 
184
(Experiment 3): 
185
During batch incubations, the Feammox reaction as well as the defluorination reaction 
186
slowed down over time, possibly due to the depletion of NH4+, Fe(III), and/or CO2, increase in 
187
pH, and/or buildup of reaction products such as Fe(II). Therefore, an longer-term experiment was 
188
set up in which a fraction of the vial’s total volume was regularly removed, thus removing some 
189
of the Fe(II) that had accumulated, while also replenishing the vials with NH4+ and Fe(III) back 
190
to its initial volume and decreasing the pH from 6/6.5 to 4.5 using HCl.  This resulted in a 
191
dilution of PFOA and F- at each replenishment step, which is considered in the analyses.  The 
192
goal of this experiment was to study the effect of this replenishment, and corresponding 
193
enhanced Feammox activity, on PFOA degradation by A6 over longer incubation periods. PFOA 
194
at an initial concentration of 0.24 mM was incubated in 100 mL vials with an incubation volume 
195
of 50 mL. A 2.5 mL sample was removed from each vial on days 0, 15, 30, 45, 60, 75, 90, 105, 
196
and 120 to conduct the routine chemical and microbiological analyses. On days 30, 60, and 90, a 
197
total of 5 mL of a solution containing 18 mM NH4+ and 12 mM Fe(III) was added to replace the 
198
solution withdrawn and replenish the oxidized NH4+ and reduced Fe(III). Measurements of 
199
NH4+, PFOA, and F- were conducted at each of these timepoints. The initial A6 concentration for 
200
this experiment was 106 copies/mL (Fig. 1).
201
2.4 Coupled kinetics between PFOA defluorination and Feammox process considering the 
202
A6 biomass for the Feammox process and for defluorination 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 11

11
203
For the kinetic formulation presented here, the Feammox process is assumed to follow a 
204
first-order kinetic with respect to the NH4+ concentration. In the formulation it is assumed that 
205
the defluorination rate of PFOA/PFOS is proportional to the NH4+ oxidation since that is the 
206
source of electrons for the reduction of both Fe(III) and PFAS.  Since the concentration of Fe(III) 
207
is orders of magnitude higher than that of PFOA, it is assumed that the defluorination of PFOA 
208
does not impact the reduction of Fe(III) in a measurable manner, although it was shown by 
209
Huang and Jaffé that when PFOA/PFOS is 100 mg/l there is a measurable decrease in Fe(III) 
210
reduction when either of these compounds is defluorinated.  It is further assumed that the growth 
211
rate of A6 is proportional to the oxidation rate of NH4+, since NH4+ is the energy source for the 
212
growth of A6.  In terms of biomass, based on the results from the defluorination experiments for 
213
different initial A6 biomass (Experiment 2), it is assumed that the Feammox and defluorination 
214
kinetics are both proportional but not linearly dependent to the A6 biomass. Based on the results 
215
of the incubations with different initial A6 biomass (Fig S1 and Fig S2), the reaction rates for 
216
NH4+ oxidation and PFAS reduction are considered to be a power function of the microbial 
217
biomass, rather than the more typical first order rate with respect to the biomass (Abhijith and 
218
Ostfeld, 2021; Murray et al., 2019; and Starzak, 1994). Thus, the following system of equations 
219
for the coupled Feammox/PFOA defluorination process was formulated:
220
𝑑𝐶𝑁𝐻4
𝑑𝑡
=‒ 𝑘𝑁𝐻4𝐶𝐹𝑒𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐶1/𝑛
𝐴6 𝐶𝑁𝐻4                                  (2)
221
𝑑𝐶𝐹𝑒𝐼𝐼𝐼
𝑑𝑡
=‒ 𝑘𝐹𝑒𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐶𝑁𝐻4𝐶1/𝑛
𝐴6 𝐶𝐹𝑒𝐼𝐼𝐼                                (3)
222
     
𝑑𝐶𝑃𝐹𝑂𝐴
𝑑𝑡
=‒ 𝑓𝑃𝐹𝑂𝐴𝑘𝑁𝐻4𝐶𝐹𝑒𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐶𝑁𝐻4𝐶1/𝑚
𝐴6 𝐶𝑃𝐹𝑂𝐴            (4)
223
𝑑𝐶𝐹
𝑑𝑡= 𝑓𝐹[ ‒
𝑑𝐶𝑃𝐹𝑂𝐴
𝑑𝑡]                                                      (5)
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 12

12
224
𝑑𝐶𝐴6
𝑑𝑡= 𝑓𝐴6[ ‒
𝑑𝐶𝑁𝐻4
𝑑𝑡] ‒ 𝑘𝑑𝐶𝐴6                                     (6)
225
Where CNH4, CFeIII, CPFOA, and CF are concentrations of NH4+, Fe(III), PFOA, F-, in 
226
solution (mg/L), respectively. CA6 is the A6 concentration, measured and expressed as the A6 
227
16S rRNA gene concentration, and kNH4 and kFeIII are the oxidation rate constant of NH4+ and 
228
reduction rate constant of Fe(III), respectively (both with a derived unit of 
229
(L^(1+1/n)/(10*copies^(1/n)*mg*hr). The fractions (dimensionless) of NH4+ oxidized used for 
230
PFOA defluorination, F- production, and A6 growth are fPFOA, fF, and fA6, respectively. The A6 
231
endogenous decay rate is kd, which is assumed to be negligible over the timeframe of the 
232
simulations in this study. The exponents, m and n, are used to describe the non-linear 
233
dependence of PFOA degradation rate and Feammox activity (NH4+ oxidation/Fe(III) reduction 
234
rates) to the A6 concentration (see discussion below and results shown in Figs. S1 and S2). 
235
Note that the shorter carbon chain PFAAs, that are produced during the degradation of 
236
PFOA or PFOS as shown by of Huang and Jaffé (2019) and Ruiz et al. (2022), are not included 
237
in this formulation.  The incubations by Huang and Jaffé (2019) showed that these smaller 
238
PFAAs that were produced during these incubations, could contain up to 16% of the total 
239
fluorine initially present in the PFOA added, which is not considered directly in the formulation 
240
shown by Equation 5 and will require further fine tuning in subsequent model formulations 
241
requiring detailed insights into the degradation kinetics of these smaller carbon-chain PFAAs.  
242
2.6 Numerical solution and parameter optimization 
243
The system of equations shown above was solved using the finite difference method and the 
244
parameters (kNH4, kFeIII, fPFOA, fF, fA6) were fitted to the Feammox and PFOA degradation data 
245
simultaneously using the Levenberg-Marquartdt algorithm (Simunek et al., 2012; Kool et al., 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 13

13
246
1987). Specifically: (1) For a given (or initial) value (βi) for each of the parameters, based on the 
247
initial concentrations of PFOA, NH4+, Fe(III), and A6 [Ci(t=0)], calculate the concentration 
248
change ΔCi(t) at Δt (=0.5 h) by applying the finite difference method to Equations (2-6). (2) 
249
Update the concentrations at t+Δt, Ci(t+Δt)= Ci(t)+ ΔCi(t) and continue the time steps until t=T 
250
(end of the experiment). (3) Iterate through all the chemicals in Equations (2-6) until a new 
251
Ci(t+Δt) is found that satisfies all the Equations (2-6). (4) For parameter optimization, the 
252
simulated Ci’s for each chemical at time t=t1, t2, …, tn (n is number of sampling time) are 
253
compared to the experimental measurements (yi) and the sum of squared errors (SSE=∑(yi-Ci)2) 
254
is calculated for all chemicals and sampling times. (5) If the SSE (Sum Squared Error) does not 
255
meet a certain preset criterion, a Jacobian matrix (J) is calculated from simulated Ci’s at βi and 
256
Ci’s at βi + 0.01βi. (6) A new parameter set β = β + Δβ is then calculated from the Jacobian 
257
matrix, where the increment Δβ = (JTJ)-1JT[Y-C(β)] with Y and C(β) as observed and simulated 
258
arrays of concentrations for all chemicals and sample times. (7) Iterate the above optimization 
259
procedure for all the chemicals until the SSE reaches a preset criterion. A schematic of the model 
260
is shown in Figure S3.
261
2.7 Model parameterization and evaluation 
262
The results from the experiments described above were then used for the model 
263
calibration and testing. A schematic on how the datasets were utilized for this purpose is shown 
264
in Figure 1.  
265
The model formulation and experimental results were used to: (1) Derive the exponents, 
266
m and n, in conjunction with NH4+ and PFOA kinetic data from the experiment with initial 
267
different A6 numbers (Experiment 2); (2) Derive the parameters, kNH4, kFeIII, and fA6, by 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 14

14
268
calibrating the model to the pure Feammox reaction without PFOA. The value of fA6 that was 
269
obtained via this calibration, was then used for all other PFAS experiments, assuming that A6 
270
growth is not affected by the presence of PFAS (Huang and Jaffé, 2019); (3) Derive the 
271
parameters, kNH4, kFeIII, fF, and fPFOA by fitting the model to the initial PFOA degradation 
272
experiments (Experiment 1) for an initial PFOA concentration of 100 mg/L; (4) Test if the model 
273
could predict the Feammox process and PFOA defluorination for the experiments with different 
274
initial PFOA concentrations using the parameters obtained from step (3). 
275
Further testing of the model for a companion dataset of PFOS was conducted by fitting 
276
the 100 mg/L PFOS Feammox/PFOS defluorination data and predicting the 10 mg/L and 0.1 
277
mg/L PFOS incubation data (Table 1 and Fig. 1). 
278
3. Results and Discussion
279
3.1 Experimental Results 
280
3.1.1 Feammox Activity and PFOA Degradation as a Function of initial PFOA Concentration 
281
(Experiment 1)
282
Concentrations of NH4+, PFOA, and F- in solution for the experiments with an initial A6 
283
concentration of 106 copies/mL and varying initial PFOA concentrations (0.1 mg/l, 10 mg/l, and 
284
100 mg/l) are shown in Fig. 2 for the pure A6 culture and in Fig. 3 for the A6 enrichment culture. 
285
NH4+ oxidization during the Feammox process showed considerable variation among 
286
experiments. Several of these incubations were done sequentially, using cultures obtained at 
287
different times, which usually have differences in their activity. Furthermore, factors such as pH 
288
affect the activity of A6, with an optimal pH = 4 (Huang and Jaffé, 2018) which gradually 
289
increases as the reaction depicted in Eq. 1 progresses, all of which explains variability between 
290
experiments.  In general, we see that in these Feammox incubations, only about 40% of the NH4+ 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 15

15
291
in solution was oxidized over 100 days in the incubations with the pure A6 culture. In contrast, 
292
in the A6 enrichment culture incubations, as much as 50% of NH4+ was oxidized over the same 
293
time period (Fig. 3).   In all incubations, the rate of ammonium oxidation decreases towards the 
294
end of the incubation period, even though the NH4+ concentration was still relatively high. This 
295
slow-down in the Feammox activity over time can be attributed to several factors, such as the 
296
depletion of CO2 in the headspace, increase of pH, and buildup of Fe(II) and possibly NO2-.  The 
297
incubations with the partial replacement of the spent Feammox medium (Experiment 3) were 
298
done to ameliorate these effects and extend the duration of the Feammox reaction.  
299
The concentrations of PFOA over the incubation time for the various incubations are 
300
shown in Figs. 2b and 3b. While the fraction of PFOA degraded was relatively similar for the 
301
different initial PFOA concentrations, they diverged for larger incubation times (>20 days). 
302
Hence, since the variables that affect the Feammox process (i.e., NH4+, Fe(II), pH, etc.) change 
303
over time differently for different incubations, depending on the activity of the bacterial culture, 
304
the PFOA defluorination rate was determined for the various incubations over the first 7 days 
305
while values for the variables affecting the Feammox process remained relatively close.   Results 
306
of this initial PFOA degradation rate vs. initial PFOA concentration are shown in Figure 4 and 
307
reveal a linear relationship between PFOA concentration and the PFOA degradation rate, which 
308
suggests a first-order biodegradation kinetics with respect to the PFOA concentration. 
309
More PFAS degradation was observed in the A6 enrichment culture incubations vs. pure 
310
A6 culture incubations. As mentioned above, it was hypothesized that A6 can break a C-F bond, 
311
after which other heterotrophic organisms in the enrichment culture can break that partially 
312
defluorinated C-C bond. This in turn facilitates A6 to defluorinate the next shorter carbon chain 
313
PFAA intermediate that is formed, resulting in an overall increased defluorination rate.  One 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 16

16
314
would expect, as will be confirmed below, that this will result in more PFOA degraded per NH4+ 
315
oxidized or higher 
 values for the A6 enrichment culture than for the pure A6 culture, and 
𝑓𝑃𝐹𝑂𝐴
316
possibly also differences in the relationship between the PFOA defluorination rate and the A6 
317
biomass.
318
The production of F- during these incubations is shown in Figs. 2c and 3c for the pure and 
319
enrichment culture incubations, respectively.  16S, a surrogate for A6 numbers, ranged from 
320
3.31-3.57x106 copies/mL in A6 pure culture and 4.05-5.03x106 copies/mL in A6 enrichment 
321
culture, regardless of the PFOA concentration. 
322
3.1.2 Feammox Activity and PFOA Degradation as a Function of the A6 Numbers 
323
(Experiment 2)
324
In both, the pure A6 culture incubations and the A6 enrichment culture incubations, the 
325
amount of NH4+ oxidized increased monotonically with increasing initial A6 concentration as 
326
shown in Figure S1a and Figure S2a, respectively. While for many biological kinetics the rates 
327
are linearly related to the biomass, this is clearly not the case for the Feammox reaction. This 
328
effect is most likely due to limitations in the transfer of the electrons to a solid-phase electron 
329
acceptor [Fe(III) in this case].  
330
As is the case for NH4+ oxidized, the degradation of PFOA also increased monotonically 
331
with increasing initial A6 concentration as shown in Figure S1b and Figure S2b, respectively. 
332
Here there is again a noticeable difference in the effect of the biomass concentration on the 
333
PFOA degradation rate for the pure A6 culture incubations and the A6 enrichment culture 
334
incubations, the later one exhibiting more PFOA degradation over the same time period. 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 17

17
335
3.1.3 Feammox Activity and PFOA Degradation during the Replenish Experiment 
336
(Experiment 3)
337
Results of the replenishment incubations for the first 120 days of incubation  are also 
338
shown in Figure 3.  Comparing the PFOA degradation and F- production of the replenish 
339
incubation, which had an initial PFOA concentration of 100 mg/l, to the single step batch 
340
incubation with the same initial PFOA concentration, revels that significantly more PFOA was 
341
degraded and F- produced during the replenishment incubation.   Accounting for the loss during 
342
the replenishment step, the amount of ammonium oxidized over the first 100 days in the 
343
replenishment incubation was 78.6 mg/L vs. 26.1 mg/L in the batch incubation. The 
344
corresponding PFOA degradation was 52.0 mg/L vs. 32.9 mg/L, respectively. These results show 
345
that PFOA degradation can be enhanced when more NH4+ is oxidized, aided by the removal of 
346
Feammox degradation products like Fe(II) and maintaining the pH closer to optimal.  
347
3.2 Kinetic Model Calibration and Simulations  
348
The experimental results show that A6 cultures, both pure and enrichment, grown at 
349
different times can have different levels of activity (e.g., rate of NH4+ oxidation, and hence 
350
growth).  That difference is attributed to differences in the culture pH, Eh, and most importantly 
351
the age of the culture.  Hence, we do not expect that the Feammox parameters will remain 
352
constant between experiments conducted with different batches of A6, and that the Feammox 
353
parameters for the incubations using different batches of A6 will need separate calibrations.  We 
354
hypothesize that while PFAS defluorination is also affected by the Feammox activity, the 
355
parameters linking defluorination to the Feammox process will remain relatively constant.  
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 18

18
356
In the proposed model, A6 growth is proportional to the Feammox reaction rate as represented 
357
by fA6 in Eq. (6), neither of which is affected by the presence of PFAS at the concentrations 
358
studied (Huang and Jaffé, 2018). 
359
3.2.1 Derivation of Exponents, m and n, Using Results from Experiment 2
360
The next step in the model calibration was to derive the m and n parameters used in 
361
Equations (2) and (4) as shown above, with 16S as a surrogate for A6 biomass. Since Experiment 
362
2 had the same initial NH4+, Fe(III), and PFOA concentrations, but different initial A6 
363
concentrations, results from these incubations were used to derive the m and n parameters using 
364
the initial 5-day degradation rate (dCNH4/dt and dCPFOA/dt) and the initial concentrations of NH4+, 
365
Fe(III), and PFOA with the assumption that these concentrations were relatively constant over 
366
the first 5 days). The fitted m values to the data shown in Figures S1 and S2 were 9.28 and 3.63 
367
for the A6 pure and A6 enrichment cultures, respectively, and the corresponding n values were 
368
11.94 and 9.62. The kNH4 values were higher in the pure culture (2.5x10-6) than in the enrichment 
369
culture (8.7x10-7) when the concentration is expressed in mg/L, t in hours, and biomass in 
370
million copies/mL). The fPFOA, was much higher in the enrichment culture than in the pure 
371
culture (0.027  vs. 0.0079), indicating that as discussed above, synergistic interactions between 
372
A6 and other bacteria in the enrichment culture result in a faster PFAS degradation rate. 
373
3.2.2 Calibration of the model Using Results from Experiment 1
374
Using the m and n values obtained in the previous step, the parameter values of kNH4, 
375
kFeIII, and fA6 were first obtained for the Feammox reactions without PFOA degradation by 
376
solving the Equations (2), (3), and (6) numerically and fitting the parameters kNH4, kFeIII, and fA6, 
377
to the experimental data of Feammox without PFOA (Table 1). The simulated NH4+, Fe(II), and 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 19

19
378
A6 concentrations describe the experimental results well, as shown in Figure 5.  The model was 
379
then calibrated for the coupled Feammox and PFOA degradation reaction to solve the full system 
380
of Equations (2-6) using the highest PFOA concentration (100 mg/L) in the Experiment 1 to 
381
ensure the most reliable F- production measurements (Fig. 6).  Although the kNH4, kFeIII, fA6 
382
parameter values were obtained by fitting the model to incubations without PFOA and then with 
383
initial PFOA concentrations of 100 mg/L, they are remarkably similar (Table 1), indicating that 
384
PFOA did not affect the Feammox process, as was the case in Huang and Jaffé (2019). The 
385
higher fF, and fPFOA values obtained for the A6 enrichment culture vs. the A6 pure culture, 
386
suggest as discussed above, that there is a synergy between A6 and other bacteria that results in a 
387
larger amount of PFOA defluorinated and hence F- produced in the A6 enrichment culture. 
388
To determine the effects of PFOA defluorination on the reduction of Fe(III) in terms of 
389
NH4+ oxidized, the ratios (Fe(II) produced/NH4+ removed) in mass/volume were compared 
390
between the pure Feammox simulation and the coupled Feammox reaction with PFOA 
391
degradation for the model. The Fe(II)/NH4+ ratio at the end of the 100-day incubations in the 
392
absence of PFOA, which is also the ratio of kFEIII/kNH4, were 18.75 (6.05, molar ratio) and 15.98 
393
(5.51, molar ratio) for the A6 pure and A6 enrichment cultures, respectively (Table 1).  These 
394
values are close to the kFEIII/kNH4 18.60 ratio (6, for a molar ratio) based on the stoichiometric 
395
relationship described in the Feammox reaction, for the A6 pure culture (Eq. 1). The lower 
396
kFEIII/kNH4 value for the A6 enrichment culture might be due to the presence of NO2- in the 
397
enrichment culture reacting with the Fe(II) thus resulting in less measurable Fe(II). 
398
Although the effect of defluorination on Fe(III) reduction is not modeled, we see similar 
399
trends in these experiments as that of Huang and Jaffe 2019 in the high PFAS concentrations, 
400
mainly that defluorination decreases the amount of Fe(III) reduced. Specifically our results show 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 20

20
401
that after PFOA was added at an initial concentration of 100 mg/L, the simulated average 
402
Fe(II)/NH4+ ratios between pure A6 and A6 enrichment culture were 14.17 (4.54 molar ratio) and 
403
10.50 (3.39 molar ratio), respectively, where the decrease in the Fe(II)/NH4+ ratio from the 
404
Feammox process in the absence of PFOA indicates that some electrons were utilized for the 
405
reductive defluorination of PFOA as reported by Huang and Jaffé (2019). However, the 
406
substantially lower Fe(II)/NH4+ ratio for the incubations with PFOA cannot be fully attributed to 
407
the effect of defluorination, suggesting that some of the Fe(II) produced was oxidized to Fe(III) 
408
by the NO2- produced, or perhaps O2 contamination while sacrificing the vials.  The effect of 
409
defluorination by A6 on the amount of Fe(III) reduced is not measurable for incubations with the 
410
lower PFAS concentrations used in this effort, and much less with PFAS concentrations that are 
411
typical for most environmental settings, therefore the effect of defluorination of Fe(III) reduction 
412
was not included in the model formulation. 
413
As already discussed above, during the 100-day incubations, almost twice as much PFOA 
414
was degraded in the incubations with the A6 enrichment culture than in the incubations with the 
415
pure A6 culture (57% vs. 31%). During the same period, 49% of NH4+ was oxidized in the pure 
416
A6 pure, whereas 57% of NH4+ was oxidized in the A6 enrichment culture. Hence, these results 
417
also indicate that in the A6 enrichment culture incubations, more PFOA is degraded per amount 
418
of NH4+ oxidized than in the pure A6 culture incubations, again, indicating a synergy between 
419
A6 and other bacteria present in the enrichment culture. This is reflected in the higher values of 
420
 for the A6 enrichment culture vs. that for the pure A6 culture, as shown in Table 1.
𝑓𝑃𝐹𝑂𝐴
421
3.2.3 Model Evaluation with testing datasets 
422
After being calibrated using the data from Experiment 1 at 100 mg/L initial PFOA 
423
concentration, the model was evaluated using the datasets from the experiments at different 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 21

21
424
initial PFAS concentrations that were not used for the calibration (Fig. 1). The model, using the 
425
derived model parameters, was able to describe the Feammox and PFAS degradation dynamics 
426
at initial PFOA concentration of 0.1 mg/L (Fig. 7), showing that similar percentages of PFOA 
427
removal from the cultures were simulated at high and low initial PFOA concentrations, which 
428
agrees with Huang and Jaffé (2019) as shown in Figure 6 and Figure 7.  The exception was that a 
429
significant discrepancy between the simulated and observed F- in solution (Fig. 7) was observed, 
430
which is attributed partially due to analytical limitations at the lower F- concentrations (Jaffé et 
431
al., 2021), and which is the reason incubations were done at the rather high concentrations of 100 
432
mg/L PFOA, where the produced F- could be monitored more accurately. The measured and 
433
simulated dynamics, using the parameters obtained via calibration for the incubations with 100 
434
mg/l PFOA, of incubations with PFOA with an initial concentration of 10 mg/L are shown in 
435
Figure S4, indicating that the model captures the A6 enrichment culture dynamics reasonably 
436
well.
437
It is interesting to note that in all the experiments shown here, as well as previous 
438
Feammox incubations with A6, the reaction slows down after two to three weeks. This can be 
439
due to a variety of factors such as limited nutrients (including NH4+, Fe(III), CO2), buildup of 
440
reaction products (i.e., NO2-, Fe(II)), or an increase in pH. As seen from Equation 1, an increase 
441
in pH or buildup of Fe(II) will significantly affect the change in Gibbs free energy, potentially 
442
making the reaction unfavorable.  Therefore, to determine if the PFAS defluorination and the 
443
Feammox reaction can be sustained for a longer period by maintaining consistent pH, NH4+, Fe 
444
(III) and CO2 levels, and by removing Fe(II), the replenishment experiment (Experiment 3) 
445
discussed above was conducted, the results of the full 240 day-experiment are shown in Figure 8. 
446
The results show that a sustained nutrient input and more constant and optimal values of pH, 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 22

22
447
CO2, and Fe(II), can prolong the Feammox reaction, resulting in the removal of 70% PFOA over 
448
240 days, and the near complete defluorination of the PFOA removed, based on F- produced. 
449
Given that only a small fraction of volume was replaced at each step (~ 6.7%) there was Fe(II) 
450
buildup over time, which may still have affected the reaction.  Hence, under natural conditions, 
451
where due to advection parameters such as pH, and Fe(II) remain relatively constant, one would 
452
expect a more sustained degradation rate, socially over longer incubation periods.  This also 
453
indicates that the kinetic parameters presented here world be alerted if the model had been 
454
calibrated to experiments that closer mimic natural conditions.
455
While F- was modeled to link PFOA defluorination to F- production for the incubations 
456
with the high PFOA concentrations, it was not our goal to accurately model F- as PFAS 
457
intermediates were not measured, and under environmental conditions it is difficult to detect 
458
changes in F- concentrations due to defluorination, given the much lower PFAS concentrations 
459
and background F-. In previous experiments by Huang and Jaffe 2019, a fluorine (F) balance 
460
showed that more than 80% of the total F present in the solution is present as in PFOA or as F461
(Huang and Jaffé, 2019). Therefore, for this model we assume that as first order estimates, as 
462
PFOA is degraded F- is released at a ratio of 15 moles of F- per 1 mole of PFOA. The close 
463
agreement of the simulated and measured F- concentrations for the 100 mg/L PFOA incubations 
464
indicates that for these incubations the buildup if intermediates was negligible in terms of 
465
fluorine content in the overall system. 
466
3.2.6 Extension and Implications of the Model Results
467
For environmental implication, we also simulated PFOA degradation by either 
468
maintaining constant NH4+ and Fe(III) concentrations (57 mg/L and 837 mg/L, respectively), 
469
representing a very large reservoir or resupply of these compounds, or by allowing their 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 23

23
470
concentrations to decrease with time during the Feammox process, which would be the case 
471
when these constituents are being utilized and not resupplied. As shown in Table 2, maintaining 
472
a high NH4+ and Fe(III) concentrations increased PFOA degradation over a one-year period by 
473
65-126% for the A6 pure culture and by 22-48% for the A6 enrichment culture. Thus, in natural 
474
systems such as riverine sediments or wetlands where NH4+ and Fe(III) may be stable due to 
475
biomass turnover and sedimentation, PFOA degradation could be faster and less constraint by the 
476
availability of NH4+ and Fe(III) than in closed incubation systems, such as have been studied to 
477
date. Results also show that due to the non-linear relationship with the A6 biomass, increasing 
478
the A6 biomass 10-fold increases the increased PFOA degradation by only 12% in the pure A6 
479
culture and by 24% in the A6 enrichment culture (Table 2). 
480
To further test the kinetic model’s applicability to other PFAS, PFOS degradation for 
481
initial PFOS concentrations of 0.1, 10, and 100 mg/L from Huang and Jaffé (2019) was 
482
simulated by assuming the same m and n parameters as determined for PFOA, since no 
483
experiments were conducted for different A6 initial concentrations for PFOS. Model parameters 
484
were determined by fitting the model, as described above, to the 100 mg/l PFOS incubations 
485
(Table 1), showing a good agreement between the fitted model output and experimental results 
486
(Fig. S5). Using these parameters, the model simulated the PFOS dynamics for initial 
487
concentrations of 0.1 and 10 mg/L (Fig. S6 and S7) with similar accuracy as that for PFOA, 
488
especially for the A6 enrichment culture. Furthermore, long-term simulation of PFOS 
489
degradation showed similar trends as PFOA (Table 2). Therefore, the proposed kinetic model 
490
coupling PFOA degradation with the Feammox process appears adequate in also simulating 
491
defluorination of other PFAAs. 
492
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 24

24
493
4. Conclusions
494
A model formulation is presented, linking the oxidation of NH4+ and reduction of ferric 
495
iron (Feammox process) by Acidimicrobium Sp. A6 to the defluorination of PFOA and PFOS.   
496
The model was calibrated using a set of incubation data and tested against different incubations. 
497
Overall, the formulation captured the coupled Feammox dynamics and defluorination kinetics 
498
well.
499
The production of F- was observed in all incubations with A6 activity where the 
500
concentration of PFAS decreased, indicating that these compounds were being defluorinated.  
501
Incubations were conducted with both, pure A6 cultures and with A6 enrichment cultures.  
502
Although the difference in NH4+ oxidation between these cultures was minor, there was 
503
significantly more PFAS defluorination in the enrichment culture per NH4+ oxidized than in the 
504
pure culture, indicating a synergism in the PFAS defluorination process between A6 and other 
505
organisms present.  This is reflected in the model parameterization, where parameters obtained to 
506
describe the Feammox process are very similar for the pure A6 and A6 enrichment culture, while 
507
the parameters required to describe the PFAS changes vary substantially between the pure and 
508
enrichment culture.
509
The coupled modeling and experimental results show that the PFAS defluorination rate is 
510
proportional to the NH4+ oxidation rate, which makes sense given that NH4+ is the electron donor 
511
for both, the iron reduction ad PFAS defluorination.  Results also show that the Feammox and 
512
defluorination kinetics increase monotonically but not linearly with the A6 biomass.
513
Although the parameters describing the Feammox reaction can vary depending on the 
514
specific activity of a culture, the model parameters linking the Feammox activity to 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 25

25
515
defluorination appear to be much less variable as shown in Table 1. The higher values of fPFOA, 
516
fF, for the A6 enrichment culture over the pure A6 culture shown in Table 1, also show that for 
517
both, PFOA and PFOS, significantly more defluorination per amount of NH4+ oxidized, and F518
production occurs in the enrichment culture incubations than in the pure culture incubations, and 
519
that these differences are consistent for PFOA and PFOS degradation. 
520
The proposed model formulation will aid in the assessment of PFAS defluorination at 
521
PFAS contaminated sites where the Feammox process is occurring, and for the design and 
522
operation of potential A6-based PFAS bioremediation schemes. 
523
Further studies on how the Feammox/PFAS defluorination kinetics are affected by 
524
various environmental conditions, including different Fe(III) phases and the presence of a much 
525
wider microbial community than in the enrichment cultures, as well as the presence of PFAS 
526
mixtures, are required to further refine the proposed model, and are under way.
527
Acknowledgements
528
Funding for this research was provided by SERDP project # ER20-1219.  The replenishment 
529
experiment is part of a project that was funded by a grant from ExxonMobil.  
530
References
531
532
Abhijith, G. R., Ostfeld, A. 2021. Model-based investigation of the formation, transmission, and 
533
health risk of perfluorooctanoic acid, a member of PFASs group, in drinking water distribution 
534
systems. Water Res. 204, 117626. 
535
536
Ahmed, M. B., Alam, M. M., Zhou, J. L., Xu, B., Johir, M. A. H., Karmakar, A. K., Rahman, M. 
537
S., Hossen, J., Hasan, A. T. M. K., Moni, M. A. 2020. Advanced treatment technologies 
538
efficacies and mechanism of perand poly-fluoroalkyl substances removal from water. Proc. 
539
25afety Environ. Protect. 136:1-14.
540
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 26

26
541
Allred, B. M., Lang, J. R., Barlaz, M. A., Field, J. A. 2015. Physical and biological release of 
542
poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) from municipal solid waste in anaerobic model 
543
landfill reactors. Environ. Sci. Technol. 49:7648-7656. 
544
545
Beskoski, V.P., Yamamoto, A., Nakano, T., Yamamoto, K., Matsumura, C., Motegi, M., 
546
Beskoski, L.S., Inui, H., 2018. Defluorination of perfluoroalkyl acids is followed by production 
547
of monofluorinated fatty acids. Sci. Total Environ. 636, 355–359. 
548
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.04.243.
549
550
Blotevogel. J., Giraud, R. J., Borch, T. 2018. Reductive defluorination of perfluorooctanoic acid 
551
by zero-valent iron and zinc: a DFT-based kinetic model. Chem. Engin. J. 335:248-254. 
552
553
Bolan, N., Sarkar, B., Yan, Y., Li, Q., Wijesekara, H., Kannan, K., Tsang, D. C. W., Schauerte, 
554
M., Bosch, J., Noll, H., Ok, Y. S., Scheckel, K., Kumpiene, J., Gobindlal, K., Kah, M., Sperry, J., 
555
Kirkham, M. B., Wang, H., Tsang, Y. F., Hou, D., Rinklebe, J. 2021. Remediation of poly- and 
556
perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) contaminated soils – To mobilize or to immobilize or to 
557
degrade? J. Hazard. Materials. 401, 123892. 
558
559
Buck, R. C., Franklin, J., Berger, U., Conder, J. M., Cousins, I. T., de Voogt, P., Jensen, A. A., 
560
Kannan, K., Mabury, S., van Leeuwen, S. P. J. Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances in 
561
theEnvironment: Terminology, Classification, and Origins. Integr. Environ. Assess. Manage. 
562
7:513-541. 
563
564
Che, S., Jin, B., Liu, Z., Yu, Y., Liu, J., Men, Y. 2021. Structure-Specific Aerobic Defluorination 
565
of Short-Chain Fluorinated Carboxylic Acids by Activated Sludge Communities. Environ. Sci. 
566
Technol. Lett. 8:668-674. 
567
568
Chetverikov, S.P., Sharipov, D.A., Korshunova, T.T., Loginov, O.N., 2017. Degradation of 
569
perfluorooctanyl sulfonate by strain pseudomonas plecoglossicida 2.4-D. Appl. Biochem. 
570
Microbiol. 53, 533–538. https://doi.org/10.1134/S0003683817050027.
571
572
Cornell, R. M.; Schwertmann, U. The Iron Oxides: Structure, Properties, Reactions, 
573
Occurrences, and Uses; John Wiley and Sons Ltd., 2003.
574
575
Ge, J., S. Huang, I. Han, P. R. Jaffé. 2019. Degradation of tetra- and trichloroethylene under iron 
576
reducing conditions by Acidimicrobiaceae sp. A6. Environ. Pollut. 247:248-255. 
577
Hamid, H., Li, L. Y., Grace, J. R. 2018. Review of the fate and transformation of per- and 
578
polyfluoroalkyl sustances (PFASs) in landfills. Environ. Pollut. 235:74-84. 
579
580
Huang, S., M. Sima, Y. Long, C. Messenger, and P.R. Jaffé, 2022. Degradation of 
581
Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA) in Biosolids by Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6. J. of Hazardous 
582
Materials,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.127699.
583
584
Huang, S., Jaffé, P. R. 2019. Defluorination of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and 
585
perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) by acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6. Environ. Sci. Technol. 
586
53:11410-11419. 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 27

27
587
588
Huang, S., Jaffé, P. R. 2018. Isolation and characterization of an ammonium-oxidizing iron 
589
reducer: Acidimicrobiaceae sp. A6. PloS ONE 13(4): e0194007. 
590
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0194007. 
591
592
Huang, S., C. Chen, X. Peng, and P.R. Jaffé. 2016. Environmental Factors Affecting the 
593
Presence of Acidimicrobiaceae and Ammonium Removal under Iron-reducing Conditions in Soil 
594
Environments. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, Vol. 98, pp. 148-158, doi: 
595
10.1016/j.soilbio.2016.04.012. 
596
597
Jaffé, P.R., Huang, S., Sima, M., Ross, I., Liu, J. 2021. ER20-1219: Biotransformation and 
598
Potential Mineralization of PFOS, PFHxS, and PFOA by Acidimicrobiaceae sp. A6 under Iron 
599
Reducing Conditions.  SERDP final Report, https://serdp600
estcp.org/index.php//content/download/53927/529646/file/ER20-1219%20Final%20Report.pdf
601
602
Ji, J., Peng, L., Redina, M. M., Gao, T., Khan, A., Liu P., Li, X. 2021. Perfluorooctane sulfonate 
603
decreases the performance of a sequencing batch reactor system and changes the sludge 
604
microbial community. Chemosphere. 279, 130596. 
605
606
Kool, J. B., Parker, J. C., van Genuchten, M. Th. 1987. Parameter estimation for unsaturated 
607
flow and transport models – A review. J. Hydrol. 91:255-293.
608
609
Kucharzyk, K. H., Darlington, R., Benotti, M., Deeb, R., Hawley, E. 2017. Novel treatment 
610
technologies for PFAS compounds: A critical review. J. Environ. Manage. 204:757-764. 
611
612
Kwon, B.G., Lim, H., Na, S., Choi, B., Shin, D., Chung, S., 2014. Biodegradation of 
613
perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) as an emerging contaminant. Chemosphere 109, 221–225. 
614
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.01.072.
615
616
Liu, C., Liu, J. 2016. Aerobic biotransformation of polyfluoroalkyl phosphate esters (PAPs) in 
617
soil. Environ. Pollut. 212:230-237.
618
619
Liu, J., Avendano, S. M. 2013. Microbial degradation of polyfluoroalkyl chemicals in the 
620
environment: A review. Environ. International. 61:98-114. 
621
622
Murray, A. M., Mailard, J., Jin, B., Broholm, M. M., Holliger, C., Rolle, M. 2019. A modeling 
623
approach integrating microbial activity, mass transfer, and geochemical processes to interpret 
624
biological assays: An example for PCE degradation in a multi-phase batch setup. Water Res. 
625
160:484-496. 
626
627
Naidu, R., Nadebaum, P., Fang, C., Cousins, I., Pennell, K., Conder, J., Newell, C. J., Longpre, 
628
D., Warner, S., Crosbie, N. D., Surapaneni, A., Bekele, D., Spiese, R., Bradshaw, T., Slee, D., 
629
Liu, Y., Qi, F., Mallavarapu, M., Duan, L., McLeod, L., Bowman, M., Richmond, B., Srivastava, 
630
P., Chadalavada, S., Umeh, A., Biswas, B., Barclay, A., Simon, J., Nathanail, P. 2020. Per- and 
631
poly-fluoroalkyl substances (PFAS): Current status and research needs. Environ. Technol. 
632
Innovation. 19, 100915. 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 28

28
633
Ruiz-Urigüen, M., W. Shuai, S. Huang, and P.R. Jaffé, “Biodegradation of PFOA in Microbial 
634
Electrolysis Cells by Acidimicrobiaceae sp. Strain A6,” Chemosphere, 2022, 
635
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2021.133506. 
636
637
Shu, D., Y. He, H. Yue,  and S. Yang. 2016. Effects of Fe(II) on microbial communities, 
638
nitrogen transformation pathways and iron cycling in the anammox process: kinetics, 
639
quantitative molecular mechanism and metagenomic analysis. RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 68005.
640
641
Senevirathna, S.T.M.L.D., Bal Krishna, K.C., Mahinroosta, R., Sathasivan, A. 2022. 
642
Comparative characterization of microbial communities that inhabit PFAS-rich contaminated 
643
sites: A case-control study. J. Hazardous Materials. 423, 126941. 
644
645
Sima, M. W. and P. R. Jaffé, 2021. A Critical Review of Modeling Poly- and Perfluoroalkyl 
646
Substances (PFAS) in the Soil-Water Environment. Sci. Total Environ. 757, 143793.
647
648
J. Šimůnek, J., van Genuchten, M. Th., Šejna, M. 2012. HYDRUS: Model use, Calibration, and 
649
Validation. Trans. ASABE. 55:1261-1274. 
650
651
Starzak, M. 1994. Macroapproach kinetics of ethanol fermentation by Saccharornyces cerevisiae: 
652
experimental studies and mathematical modelling. Chemical Engine. J. 54:221-240. 
653
654
Teaf, C. M., Garber, M. M., covert, D. J., tuovila, B. J. 2019. Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA): 
655
environmental sources, chemistry, toxicology, and potential risks. Soil Sediment Contamin. 
656
28:258-273. 
657
658
United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 2020. Drinking Water Health 
659
Advisories for PFOA and PFOS. https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking660
water/drinking-water-health-advisories-pfoa-and-pfos (accessed 2, November 2021). 
661
662
Yi, L.B., Chai, L.Y., Xie, Y., Peng, Q.J., Peng, Q.Z., 2016. Isolation, identification, and 
663
degradation performance of a PFOA-degrading strain. Genet. Med. Res. 15 https:// 
664
doi.org/10.4238/gmr.15028043 gmr.15028043.
665
666
667
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 29

29
668
Table 1. Calibrated parameters for PFOA and PFOS. The model was first calibrated with pure 
669
Feammox process without PFAS to obtain the fA6 parameter. Assuming the fA6 parameter did not 
670
change, other parameters were calibrated from Experiment 1 at 100 mg/L initial PFAS 
671
concentrations. (Fig. 1). 
672
PFAS
A6 Culture
kNH4
kFeIII
fA6
fPFOA
fF
kFeIII/kNH4
(mass)
kFeIII/kNH4
(mole)
pure
3.96x10-7
7.44x10-6
0.1153
-
-
18.75
6.05
No PFAS 
(Feammox)
enrichment
4.03x10-7
6.43x10-6
0.1403
-
-
15.98
5.15
pure
4.59x10-7
6.51x10-6
0.1153
0.0119
0.2419
14.17
4.57
PFOA
enrichment
5.06x10-7
5.32x10-6
0.1403
0.0211
0.4536
10.50
3.39
pure
3.02x10-7
4.48x10-6
0.1153
0.0095
0.1333
14.79
4.77
PFOS
enrichment
2.36x10-7
2.93x10-6
0.1403
0.0279
0.5461
12.41
4.00
673
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 30

30
674
Table 2. Simulated PFAS degradation under plausible natural conditions (at 0.1 mg/L initial 
675
PFAS concentration) based on parameters derived from PFAS concentration of 100 mg/L in pure 
676
A6 and A6 enrichment culture, respectively. NH4+ and Fe(III) were either maintained at constant 
677
(57 and 837 mg/L, respectively) or decreased during the Feammox reaction without 
678
replenishment of NH4+ and Fe(III). 
679
% of PFOA degraded in given months
PFAS
Culture
NH4+
Fe(III)
3 mon
6 mon
9 mon
12 mon
A6 x 1
No replenishment
25.1
33.2
37.1
39.2
A6 x 1
Maintain at initial 
concentrations
41.5
67.8
82.8
91.1
A6 enrichment x 1
No replenishment
52.7
65.5
70.7
73.3
A6 enrichment x 1
Maintain at initial 
concentrations
78.2
97.1
99.7
>99.9
A6 x 10
No replenishment
27.6
35.4
39.0
41.0
A6 x 10
Maintain at initial 
concentrations
46.6
72.2
85.8
92.8
A6 enrichment x 10
No replenishment
65.5
76.0
79.9
81.8
PFOA
A6 enrichment x 10
Maintain at initial 
concentrations
88.9
99.1
99.9
>99.9
A6 x 1
No replenishment
18.4
26.0
30.0
32.5
A6 x 1
Maintain at initial 
concentrations
28.0
49.8
65.7
76.9
A6 enrichment x 1
No replenishment
44.3
61.4
69.5
74.0
A6 enrichment x 1
Maintain at initial 
concentrations
58.2
86.1
96.0
>99.0
A6 x 10
No replenishment
20.6
28.1
31.9
34.3
A6 x 10
Maintain at initial 
concentrations
32.1
54.5
69.8
80.1
A6 enrichment x 10
No replenishment
59.2
74.2
80.4
83.7
PFOS
A6 enrichment x 10
Maintain at initial 
concentrations
74.7
94.2
98.8
>99.0
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 31

31
681
Fig. 1. Model parameterization (calibration) and evaluation (testing). The 100 mg/L PFOA 
682
incubations from Experiment 1, were used for parameterization and the remaining incubations 
683
were used as testing datasets. The fA6 parameter was obtained by fitting the pure Feammox 
684
process and used for all experiments. 
685
686
 
687
688
689
690
691
692
693
694
695
696
697
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 32

32
698
Fig. 2. NH4+ oxidation, PFOA biodegradation, and F- production in pure A6 culture incubations 
699
from Experiments 1 trough 3.
700
701
702
  
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 33

33
703
Fig. 3. NH4+ oxidation, PFOA biodegradation, and F- production in A6 enrichment culture 
704
incubations from Experiments 1 trough 3.
705
   
706
            
707
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 34

34
708
Fig. 4. Initial PFOA degradation rate (0-7 days) as a function of the initial PFOA concentrations 
709
in Experiment 1.
710
711
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 35

35
712
Fig. 5. Measured and simulated NH4+, Fe(II), and A6 concentrations vs. time  during Feammox 
713
reaction without PFOA in the pure A6 and A6 enrichment cultures (Table 1). 
714
715
716
717
718
719
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 36

36
720
Fig. 6. Measured and simulated NH4+, Fe(II), PFOA, F-, and A6 concentrations vs. time in pure 
721
A6 and enrichment cultures for the Experiment 1 for incubations with an initial PFOA 
722
concentration of 100 mg/L (Table 1). 
723
724
725
726
727
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 37

37
728
Fig. 7. Predicted NH4+, Fe(II), PFOA, F-, and A6 concentrations with time in pure A6 and 
729
enrichment cultures for Experiment 1 incubations with an initial PFOA concentration of 0.1 
730
mg/L , which was calibrated using the 100 mg/L concentration dataset (Table 1).  
731
732
733
734
735
736
737
738
739
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 38

38
740
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 39

39
741
Fig. 8. Replenishment experiment results (Experiment 3) (Table 1). 
742
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 40

40
743
Supplemental Materials
744
745
Fig. S1. NH4+ oxidation, PFOA biodegradation, and F- production in A6 pure cultures for 
746
different initial A6 biomass concentrations from Experiment 2. 
747
748
749
750
751
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 41

41
752
Fig. S2. NH4+ oxidation, PFOA biodegradation, and F- production in A6 enrichment cultures for 
753
different initial A6 biomass concentrations from Experiment 2. 
754
755
756
757
758
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 42

42
759
760
Fig. S3. Numerical algorithm to solve the system of kinetic equations.
761
762
763
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 43

43
764
Fig. S4. Predicted Feammox process and PFOA degradation for an initial PFOA concentration of 
765
10 mg/L. Parameters were calibrated from Experiment 1 and incubations with an initial PFOA 
766
concentration of 100 mg/L (Table 1).
767
768
769
770
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 44

44
771
Fig. S5. Fitted NH4+, Fe(II), PFOS, F-, and A6 concentrations vs. time for pure A6 and 
772
enrichment culture incubations for PFOS at an initial concentration of 100 mg/L (Table 1). 
773
774
775
776
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 45

45
777
Fig. S6. Predicted NH4+, Fe(II), PFOS, F-, and A6 concentrations vs time for pure A6 and 
778
enrichment culture incubations for the initial PFOS concentration of 0.1 mg/L using parameters 
779
calibrated from the 100 mg/L PFOS concentration (Table 1).  
780
781
782
783
784
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

## Page 46

46
785
Fig. S7. Predicted Feammox process and PFOS degradation for the initial PFOS concentration of 
786
10 mg/L using parameters calibrated from the 100 mg/L PFOS concentration (Table 1).
787
788
789
790
791
792
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4110870
Preprint not peer reviewed

