# toxics-11-01001

**Source PDF**: toxics-11-01001.pdf

---

## Page 1

Citation: Chetverikov, S.;
Hkudaygulov, G.; Sharipov, D.;
Starikov, S.; Chetverikova, D.
Biodegradation Potential of C7-C10
Perﬂuorocarboxylic Acids and Data
from the Genome of a New Strain of
Pseudomonas mosselii 5(3). Toxics 2023,
11, 1001. https://doi.org/10.3390/
toxics11121001
Academic Editors: Chang-Gui Pan
and Runxia Sun
Received: 3 November 2023
Revised: 4 December 2023
Accepted: 6 December 2023
Published: 8 December 2023
Copyright:
© 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
toxics
Communication
Biodegradation Potential of C7-C10 Perﬂuorocarboxylic Acids
and Data from the Genome of a New Strain of Pseudomonas
mosselii 5(3)
Sergey Chetverikov
, Gaisar Hkudaygulov *, Danil Sharipov, Sergey Starikov and Darya Chetverikova
Ufa Institute of Biology, Subdivision of the Ufa Federal Research Centre of the Russian Academy of Sciences,
450054 Ufa, Russia; che-kov@mail.ru (S.C.); male886@yandex.ru (D.S.); senik0406@gmail.com (S.S.);
belka-strelka8031@yandex.ru (D.C.)
* Correspondence: bio-logos@yandex.com
Abstract: The use of bacteria of the genus Pseudomonas—destructors of persistent pollutants for
biotechnologies of environmental puriﬁcation—is an interesting area of research. The aim of this work
was to study the potential of Pseudomonas mosselii strain 5(3) isolated from pesticide-contaminated
soil as a degrader of C7-C10 perﬂuorocarboxylic acids (PFCAs) and analyze its complete genome.
The genome of the strain has been fully sequenced. It consists of a chromosome with a length of
5,676,241 b.p. and containing a total of 5134 genes, in particular, haloalkane dehalogenase gene (dhaA),
haloacetate dehalogenase H-1 gene (dehH1), ﬂuoride ion transporter gene (crcB) and alkanesulfonate
monooxygenase gene (ssuE), responsible for the degradation of ﬂuorinated compounds. The strain
P. mosselii 5(3) for was cultivated for 7 days in a liquid medium with various C7-C10 PFCAs as the
sole source of carbon and energy, and completely disposed of them. The results of LC-MS analysis
showed that the transformation takes place due to perﬂuorohexanoic acid with the release of various
levels of stoichiometry (depending on PFCA) of ﬂuorine ion mineralization indicators determined by
ion chromatography. Thus, Pseudomonas mosselii strain 5(3) demonstrates a genetically conﬁrmed
high potential for the decomposition of C7-C10 PFCA.
Keywords: perﬂuorocarboxylic acids; biodegradation; transformation; Pseudomonas; genome
1. Introduction
Perﬂuorocarboxylic acids (PFCAs) have recently been subjected to close regulation
by international supervisory authorities due to their lability; bioaccumulation ability;
and resistance, including biostability that is based on the strength of the carbon–ﬂuorine
interaction, which forms the strongest bond ever discovered [1]. The identiﬁcation of these
properties characterizing their toxicity to wildlife led earlier to their inclusion in Annex B
of the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants [2].
The main signiﬁcant representatives of this class of compounds are perﬂuorooctanoic
acid (PFOA) and perﬂuorooctanesulfonate (PFOS), these synthetic chemical compounds exhibit remarkable stability and are extensively employed in the fabrication of ﬂuoropolymers
for non-stick surfaces, pesticides, protective agents for fabrics, food packaging, electroplating and as components of ﬁre-ﬁghting foams, such as surfactants [3–8]. As a result, PFCAs
are omnipresent in the global ecosystem, migrating through soil and water systems [9,10].
Its toxicological effects on humans are characterized by various types of cancer, disorders of
the immune system and liver, and inﬂuence on growth, fetal development and reproductive
function [11–14].
Hence, the imperative lies in expeditiously devising effective techniques for the decomposition of PFCA compounds. Various approaches have been explored for the degradation
of PFOS, including chemical treatment, high-temperature incineration, and ultrasound techniques. However, these methods have proven to be both costly and inefﬁcient in achieving
Toxics 2023, 11, 1001. https://doi.org/10.3390/toxics11121001
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/toxics

## Page 2

Toxics 2023, 11, 1001
2 of 14
satisfactory results [15–18]. The biodegradation of PFCAs is further complicated by their
unique chemical properties, speciﬁcally their intricate molecular structures and substantial
molecular sizes which pose a myriad of physiological challenges for microorganisms, the
absorption of which by bacteria requires specialized active transport pathways. Previously,
it was assumed that microorganisms did not have time to evolve in order to decompose
PFCA (especially in comparison with the favorable results of the dehalogenation of polychlorinated molecules [19]) by developing the enzymatic systems acting on them. This was
due to the lack of analogues in nature that would stimulate the evolution of the necessary
catabolic enzymes [20]. But recently it has been shown that the deformation of PFCA is still
possible. And it occurs mainly when microbial enzymes attack ﬂuoride-free carbon covalent
bonds (for example, CS and CO), as shown during the biodegradation of PFOA and PFOS,
ﬂuorotelomers in aerobic [21,22] and anaerobic conditions [23–25]. Some other works show
the destruction of PFOS and/or PFOA, which is not conﬁrmed by the release of ﬂuorine
ions, suggesting that minor polyﬂuorinated compounds are preferably formed as a result
of these biotransformations [26–29]. The successful disruption of CF bonds has been widely
acknowledged as a pivotal factor in the natural breakdown of organoﬂuorine substances,
such as PFCA [30]. The elimination of ﬂuoride effectively nulliﬁes the discernible impact of
this heteroatom on the chemical stability of the organic compound, which is attributable
to its exceptional electronegativity. This not only enhances the probability of the facile
decomposition of the resultant metabolites but also accentuates their overall susceptibility
to breakdown [31].
In most of these studies, the destructors of organofluorine compounds are Pseudomonads.
These microorganisms have garnered extensive research attention owing to their remarkable metabolic adaptability; they are destructors of various xenobiotics. Harnessing their
unparalleled metabolic versatility, these microorganisms thrive by exclusively utilizing
them as the primary carbon and energy source. The genomes of various Pseudomonas
strains across distinct species has been meticulously analyzed and documented, for example, P. protegens (strain Pf-5), P. ﬂuorescens (strains Pf-01, SBW25), P. azelaica (strains
HBP1, Aramco J), P. putida (strain L48), P. mendocina (strain YMP), etc. The approximate
size of Pseudomonas genomes is around 6 Mb [32]. A multitude of genes participate in
the breakdown of diverse carbon sources and their adaptation to thrive within a speciﬁc
ecological habitat.
But from the point of view of genomic data, studies on PFCA degradation genes
are an open book that requires ﬁlling. Currently, a scarcity of knowledge regarding bacterial strains harboring genetic sequences responsible for encoding a diverse array of
enzymes that break down PFCAs can be detected and described. The exceptions are
P. parafulva YAB-1 and Delftia acidovorans D4B strains (the genus Delftia is close to the genus
Pseudomonas)—exploring the potential of bacterial strains housing recognized putative
halogen acid dehalogenases and ﬂuoroacetate dehalogenase as catalysts in the breakdown
of ﬂuorinated compounds [33,34]. And the list is not so extensive; only a few strains of
bacteria are known to be capable of transforming perﬂuorocarboxylic acids. And they are
only associated with the biodegradation of PFOA and PFOS, with no mentions found in
the literature regarding other PFCA compounds. The aforementioned strain P. parafulva
YAB-1 can degrade 32.2% of perﬂuorooctanoic acid at an initial concentration of 500 mg/L,
while P. aeruginosa HJ4 can break down PFOS by 67% at a concentration not exceeding
2 mg/L [26].
PFCA biodegradation researchers focus mainly on C8 compounds, but their bioaccumulation potential increases with increasing carbon chain length [35]. Recent studies have
highlighted that short-chain PFCAs exhibit enhanced mobility, increased water solubility,
and heightened resistance to degradation when compared to their long-chain counterparts [36,37].
Therefore, when assessing biodegradation, it is necessary not to focus only on PFOA
and PFOS—the Stockholm Convention’s inventory of persistent ﬂuorinated organic pollutants will likely expand this in the future—as the recently uncovered toxic attributes

## Page 3

Toxics 2023, 11, 1001
3 of 14
of short-chain PFCA have emerged. Additionally, if the adaptation of microorganisms
to PFOS and PFOA has already been presented in publications, then the resistance of
microorganisms to intermediate products of their deﬂuorination and decomposition and
released ﬂuorine ions, on the one hand, and their high-molecular precursors, on the other
hand, have yet to be evaluated.
In this study, a new strain called Pseudomonas mosselii 5(3) was tested and isolated from
soil contaminated with herbicides, including ﬂuorinated ones. This strain was identiﬁed
using methods of molecular biology, as well as the analysis of morphological, physiological
and biochemical characteristics. The genome sequencing, the study of genetic features, and
biodegradation potential of the strain in relation to C7-C10 PFCAs were carried out. These
results can be effectively applied in biotechnologies of environmental rehabilitation from
contamination with organoﬂuorine compounds.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Bacterial Strain
Strain 5(3) was obtained from arable soil which had been affected by pesticide contamination in the Yanaulsky district of the Republic of Bashkortostan, Russian Federation
(56.11381◦North latitude, 54.766226◦East longitude). The soil for isolating microorganisms
belonged to dark-grey forest soil (Haplic Greyzems) and was characterized by the following
parameters: total humus, 6.8%; Ntotal, 0.60%; P2O5, 65.4 mg/kg; K2O, 112.5 mg/kg; available copper and exchangeable zinc, 8.4 and 0.9 mg/kg soil, respectively; and pH of water,
5.2. The pesticide contamination consisted of a mixture including phosphorus-containing
glyphosate (active ingredient—N-(phosphonomethyl)glycine), chlorine-containing octapone (active ingredient—2-(2,4-dichlorophenoxy)acetic acid), and ﬂuorine-containing
ﬂuroxalam (active ingredient—N-(2,6-diﬂuorophenyl)-8-ﬂuoro-5-methoxy-[1,2,4]triazolo
[1,5-c]pyrimidine-2-sulfonamide). Strain 5(3) was deposited in the collection of microorganisms of the Ufa Institute of Biology (IB UFSC RAS) as UIB-251.
2.2. Chemicals and Reagents
The perﬂuorocarboxylic acids (PFCAs) in the following list were used: perﬂuorodecanoic acid (PFDA), perﬂuorononic acid (PFNA), perﬂuorooctanoic acid (PFOA), perﬂuoroheptanoic acid (PFHpA) and perﬂuorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) (all high purity > 98%).
These were acquired from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Acetonitrile (quality for
HPLC) was purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). All remaining reagents were of
analytical-grade grade.
2.3. Genome Sequencing, Assembly and Annotation
The isolation of genomic DNA was conducted using a fresh culture biomass (a colony)
of strain 5(3), grown on LB agar using the phenol-chloroform method according to the
protocol [38]. Sequencing was performed on a GenoLab M system (GeneMind Biosciences
Co., Ltd., Luohu, China), and the library was prepared with a ShotGun SG GM library
preparation kit (cat. No SG_GM-96, Raissol, Russia). A quality control of the reading was
performed using “HTQC” [38]. Low-quality (Q < 25) and short (<100 bp) readings and adapter
sequences were removed using Trimomatic v.0.39 software [39]. Raw filtered readings were
de novo assembled using SPAdes version 3.15.4 software [40]. We employed Pilon version
1.23 [41] and Bowtie2 version 2.3.5.1 [42] for error correction purposes. In order to validate
the circular nature of our assembled replicon, we assessed the presence of overlapping ends.
To determine the strain’s species identity, we utilized the average nucleotide identity (ANI)
value (https://www.ezbiocloud.net/tools/ani (accessed on 23 October 2023) [43]) and digital
DNA-DNA hybridization (DDH) analysis (https://ggdc.dsmz.de/ggdc.php (accessed on 26
October 2023) [44]), with default settings.
We leveraged Prokka software v1.14.5 to annotate the genome [45]. To unravel the functional potential of certain hypothetical proteins, we employed the Basic Local Alignment
Search Tool (BLAST) [46].

## Page 4

Toxics 2023, 11, 1001
4 of 14
This genome project has been deposited at GenBank under the accession numbers
JAUHUJ000000000 and under BioSample number SAMN36271085, BioProject number
PRJNA990579, and SRA accession number SRR25905155.
We used FASTME 2.1.6.1 software [47] to generate a minimum evolutionary tree
using intergenomic distances. The tree was rooted at the midpoint [48] and visualized
through the online platform https://itol.embl.de/ (accepted date, 30 October 2023) [49].
The clustering of species and sub-species was performed following the protocols described
in references [50,51], respectively. To determine the average nucleotide genome identity
(ANI) between strain 5(3) and its related strains, we employed the OrthoANI algorithm [52].
2.4. Growing Environments and Conditions
Strain 5(3) was grown at 28 ◦C on Raymond liquid mineral medium (gram per liter
of distilled water): NH4NO3—2.0; MgSO4 × 7H2O—0.2; KH2PO4—2.0; Na2HPO4—3;
CaCl2 × 6H2O—0.01; and Na2CO3—0.1 [53]. Additionally, PFDA, PFNA, PFOA, PFHpA
or PFOS (250 mg/L) was the sole carbon and energy source in an orbital shaker–incubator
ES-20/60 (SIA BIOSAN, Riga, Latvia) at 180 rpm.
To obtain the inoculate, the strain was grown on a Raymond mineral medium with
the addition of peptone (1 g/L) for 24 h. Prior to inoculation into experimental ﬂasks, the
biomass underwent precipitation and washing with sterile distilled water and was added
to experimental ﬂasks until 0.1 OD600 was reached.
A lysogeny broth (LB) [54], consisting of (per liter of distilled water) 10 g of trypton,
5 g of yeast extract, 5 g of NaCl and 15 g of agar (PanReac, Barcelona, Spain), was used to
isolate colonies and determine the bacterial count.
In order to evaluate the efﬁciency of PFCA degradation, the strain 5(3) was cultivated
at a temperature of 28 ◦C in a liquid mineral medium containing individual C7-C10 PFCA
compounds for 7 days. The experimental protocols were carried out in three autonomous
biological repeats.
2.5. Isolation and Identiﬁcation of PFCA Biotransformation Products
The content of PFCA in the medium was evaluated, and the products of their biotransformation were identiﬁed on a liquid tandem chromatography-mass spectrometer
LCMS-IT-TOF (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) (at the AGIDEL UFSC RAS Equipment Collective Use Center) in ultraﬁltrates (≤3 kDa) of culture liquids obtained by ultraﬁltration on
Vivaﬂow 50 (Sartorius AG, Göttingen, Germany), as described [21].
The Shim-pack XR-ODS column (75 mm × 2.0 mm id, 2.2 µm) (Shimadzu, Kyoto,
Japan) was used for UFLC analysis, in a gradient elution system with 5 mM ammonium
acetate in acetonitrile (A) and 0.1% acetic acid (v/v) in water (B). A linear gradient elution
was employed, with the following speciﬁcations: from 0 min to 10 min, the composition
transitioned from 60% to 30% (B); then, from 10 min to 20 min, the composition reversed,
transitioning from 30% back to 60% (B). The chromatographic separation was performed
maintaining a steady ﬂow rate of 0.25 mL/min, employing an injection volume of 5 mL.
Mass spectrometry data were acquired from an electrospray ionization (ESI) source, which
was operated in negative ionization mode. MS operating conditions were as follows: probe
voltage, −3.5 kV; curve desolvation line (CDL) and heat block temperature, 200 ◦C; detector
voltage, 1.57 kV; nebulizing gas (N2) ﬂow, 1.5 L/min; collision gas and cooling gas (argon),
50 kPa and 105 kPa, respectively. Parent ion m/z was acquired in the 150–700 range, with
an ion accumulation time of 100 ms (event time, 432 ms; repeat = 3). The timing and
separation characteristics of the chromatogram are shown in Figure S1.
The structure of the obtained compounds was determined based on a set of data from
the analysis of mass spectra based on the decay of a molecular ion and comparison with
literature data.
Metabolic pathways were drawn using ChemSketch 2023.1.1.
The ﬂuoride balance was determined by ion chromatography using an LC-20 Prominence HPLC system with a CDD-10Avp conductometric detector (Shimadzu, Japan). Flu-

## Page 5

Toxics 2023, 11, 1001
5 of 14
orine ions were separated on a Shodex column (Shodex, New York, NY, USA) at a ﬂow
rate of 1 mL/min. An aqueous solution of sodium carbonate and sodium bicarbonate was
used as an eluent: 1.8 mM Na2CO3 + 1.7 mM NaHCO3. Post-column eluent suppression
was achieved by employing a Xenoic® XAMS suppressor coupled with an ASUREX-A100
(Diduco AB, Umeå, Sweden).
2.6. Statistical Analysis
The statistical analysis was conducted utilizing Microsoft Ofﬁce Excel 2021 software.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Identiﬁcation and Functional Annotation of the Genome of Strain 5(3)
Cells of the strain 5(3) are Gram-negative, motile, with a single polar ﬂagellum,
asporogenous and rod-shaped, able to produce a ﬂuorescent pigment during cultivation on
a King B medium. On nutrient agar, they form circular and non-pigmented colonies. The
growth temperature range lies in interval of 10–36 ◦C; the optimal growth temperature is
between 26 and 30 ◦C. The optimal pH value is 6.8–8.0. They do not reduce nitrate to nitrite.
Arginine dihydrolase, catalase and cytochrome oxidase are produced. The Voges–Proskauer
reaction is negative.
The strain did not hydrolyze lecithin or starch but hydrolyzed gelatin. The strain
did not synthesize lipolytic enzymes and was not able to grow on a medium with twin80. At a concentration of 0–5% NaCl, intensive growth was observed, and at a higher
concentration of up to 10% NaCl, weak growth was observed. The strain 5(3) did not use
xylose, rhamnose, galactose, malonate, D-tartrate, benzoate, or L-tryptophan as the sole
source of carbon and energy. Ribose, glucose, D-mannose, D-mannitol, ketogluconate,
L-histidine, L-rhamnose, histamine and D-sorbitol were used as carbon sources.
Based on a preliminary analysis of physiological and biochemical data and the 16S
rRNA gene, the strain was identiﬁed as belonging to the Pseudomonas genus. Pseudomonads
have a large number of assemblies represented in various databases such as NCBI, BV-BRS,
TYG, and Pseudomonas.com [55]. Detailed taxonomy of this genus is still lacking and
despite a long history of study and extensive databases, it is constantly being supplemented
with new ﬁndings. As the result of the analysis of genome-wide sequencing, the strain
5(3) (Figure 1A) was reliably referred to as Pseudomonas mosselii, and the values of the
main identiﬁcation parameters relative to the reference (Pseudomonas mosselii DSM17497T)
are as follows: ANI, 97.40%, and DDH, 80.30% (with species thresholds > 95% and >70%,
respectively [56]).
The sequencing and complete genome assembly of the strain Pseudomonas mosselii 5(3)
revealed that the assembly contained 5134 coding sequences (CDSs), four rRNA clusters,
and 65 tRNAs. The genome consists of 73 contigs with a total length of 5,676,241 bp. The
N50 value is 165,927 bp, and the GC content is 64.38%.
Of the 5134 genes, 2895 (56.8%) were functionally annotated (Figure 1B).
The result of the functional annotation shows that strain 5(3) possesses genes of all
metabolic pathways necessary for the existence of an autonomous culture.
The category of “Xenobiotics biodegradation and metabolism” in strain 5(3) contains
more than 60 genes. Most of this category is associated with the degradation of various
aromatic compounds (including ethylbenzene, nitrotoluene xylene, styrene, naphthalene,
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon, aminobenzoate, dioxin and atrazine). According to [57],
laccases and dehalogenases emerge as the most promising contenders for PFCA biotransformation enzymes. These enzymes are currently under the scrutiny of scientists investigating
biocatalysis as a tool for removing persistent pollutants, including PFCA. Indeed, the
putative enzymes potentially involved in PFCA decarboxylation and decarbonylation
were found within the investigated genome with a 50% occurrence rate. The genes that
could participate in the destruction of ﬂuorinated organic compounds (dehalogenation)
include the haloalkane dehalogenase gene (dhaA) and the haloacetate dehalogenase H-1

## Page 6

Toxics 2023, 11, 1001
6 of 14
gene (dehH1). Like the previously characterized ﬂuoracetate dehalogenases [58], they can
mediate the deﬂuorination of PFCA at the alpha-carbon position.
Figure 1. Whole-genome tree of the position of strain 5(3) within the genus Pseudomonas (A) and
the number of genes associated with common functional categories in its genome according to the
KEGG classiﬁcation (B).
And the mechanisms of resistance to them can be mediated by the presence of the
following:
-
Decarboxylase gene (novR), which can carry out several successive steps of the oxidative decarboxylation of PFCA; this was previously described and shown, using a
chemical method, for similar compounds [59];
-
Alkanesulfonate monooxygenase gene (ssuE), catalyzing the desulfonation of various
organosulfonate substrates under conditions of sulfate starvation, which can also
produce a protective role under conditions of oxidative stress [60];
-
Fluoride ion transporter gene (crcB). With an increase in ﬂuoride levels, it enhances the
transcriptional activity of genes located further downstream. It is assumes that these
genes aid in reducing the detrimental impacts caused by excessive concentrations of
ﬂuoride [61], and assumes that many genes are regulated by them. According to [62],
effective deﬂuorination activity will require a high level of tolerance to elevated
intracellular concentrations of F−in the microorganism.
Pseudomonas genomes possess a diverse array of enzymes with the potential to facilitate deﬂuorination reactions, utilizing both oxygenase-mediated biodegradation processes
and anaerobic metabolic activities. While the complete functionality of these enzymes in
deﬂuorination mechanisms remains undisclosed, it is conceivable that these degradative
enzymes might contribute to Pseudomonas’ response to intracellular ﬂuoride release.

## Page 7

Toxics 2023, 11, 1001
7 of 14
In none of the previous publications devoted to the destruction of organoﬂuorine
compounds by microorganisms have the authors found any mention of the conﬁrmed
presence of the presented complex of enzymes.
It should be remembered that Pseudomonas genomes encode > 25% of proteins with
unknown function, which suggests that the new deﬂuorinating activity may belong to
them [63,64].
3.2. Growth on C7-C10 PFCA and Their Deﬂuorination
To grow on PFCA, bacteria need to transport it into the cell, develop an efﬁcient
enzyme capable of catalyzing the cleavage of the strong C-F bond, and detect a toxic
ﬂuorine ion and remove it from the cell. And it seems that this was not a problem for
the P. mosselii strain 5(3). The strain actively grew on mineral media containing C7-C10
PFCA as the only source of carbon (Figure 2A–E), reaching the highest point of optical
density of the culture liquid after 6–7 days, and the maximum optical density was in the
range of 0.7–1.0 depending on the acid and was directly related to the quantity of carbon
atoms of the PFCA. With the growth of the strain on C7-C10 perﬂuorocarboxylic acids, their
complete decomposition took place after 7 days, but 5 days were enough for the bacteria to
transform PFOS.
The results obtained in this study are signiﬁcantly superior to those presented earlier.
The closest result to us was declared by the authors in work [23] and was achieved using
a strain of Acidimicrobium sp. A6 for the removal of PFOA and PFOS in an aerobic environment, where the degree of biodegradation did not exceed 63% for a concentration of
100 mg/L for 100 days.
Only in contrast to them, we observed the release of F−, which is an indicator of
partial decomposition and perhaps these ions cause the inhibition of the further destruction
of intermediate ﬂuorinated compounds. The transformation of perﬂuorinated substrates
was in parallel with the release of free F−into the medium, and the beginning of release
correlated with the beginning of a linear decrease in their concentration in the medium. The
absence of an inhibitory effect on bacterial growth is precisely explained by the presence of
the ﬂuoride ion transporter gene, which allows the bacteria to cross the physiological barrier
of ﬂuoride toxicity during the decomposition of PFCAs, and to carry out deﬂuorination,
regardless of the difference in redox potentials of the processes, at the level of dechlorination
of the polychlorinated compounds.
3.3. Biodegradation of C7-C10 PFCAs
The biological degradation of PFCAs may include several steps, including decarboxylation, hydroxylation and deﬂuorination reactions.
During chromatographic analysis with mass spectrometry in the initial culture liquid
when cultivating strain 5(3) in a medium with PFHpA, we observed its dissociated acid
ions (molecular ion with an m/z ratio of 363) (Figure 2F). A day later, a compound with
m/z 319 was detected in the ultraﬁltrate, which may occur as a result of the elimination of
the COO−group (m/z 44) from the carboxyl group. Its concentration continued to increase
up to 4 days, after which a component with m/z 313, identiﬁed as perﬂuorohexanoic acid
(PFHxA), began to appear in the medium, presumably under the action of the enzyme
haloalkane dehalogenase. After 6 days, this compound prevailed in the culture liquid. A
similar series of reactions took place during the conversion of homologous acids, including
PFOA (m/z 413) (Figure 2G), PFNA (m/z 463) (Figure 2H), and PFDA (m/z 513) (Figure 2I).
Intermediate products between cycles differed by the amount of mass of the cleaved CF2−
group, i.e., at m/z 50. Everywhere, PFHxA was found as the ﬁnal prevailing destruction
product in an amount from 50 to 95% of the total destruction products. It took two such
reaction cycles to decompose PFOA, three cycles to decompose PFNA, and four cycles to
decompose PFDA.

## Page 8

Toxics 2023, 11, 1001
8 of 14
 
Figure 2. Dynamics of growth of Pseudomonas mosselii strain 5(3) (OD600), release of ﬂuorine ions,
changes in PFCA concentration (graphs on the left) and percentages of its and its degradation
products (according to m/z) (histograms on the right) during cultivation in a liquid mineral medium:
(A,F)—PFHpA; (B,G)—PFOA; (C,H)—PFNA; (D,I)—PFDA; (E,J)—PFOS.

## Page 9

Toxics 2023, 11, 1001
9 of 14
PFCA compounds, which also include C−S and C−C bonds, have the potential for
one-electron reduction or oxidation, followed by hydroxylation.
Similarly, we assumed that sulfonate group in PFOS would ﬁrst break with the release
of sulﬁte for bacterial metabolism, and that the synthesis of perﬂuorooctane followed by
the release of hydroxyl and carboxyl groups and deﬂuorination reactions results in the
formation of perﬂuoroheptanoic acid, as shown in our previous work [21]. But in the
realities of the experiment, everything was different. During the decomposition of PFOS
(m/z 499) (Figure 2J), probably with the participation of haloacetate dehalogenase H-1, free
electrons attacked the most vulnerable spot, the α-position of the ﬂuorine of the alkyl chain,
replacing two ﬂuorine atoms with hydrogen, followed by the elimination of the carbon–
carbon bond of the alkyl chain through an intermediate unidentiﬁed a product with m/z
461, i.e., shortening the chain by CH2 with its release and the formation of perﬂuoroheptane
sulfonate (m/z 449) by day 2 of cultivation. This was followed by a similar cycle and the
formation of perﬂuorohexane sulfonate (m/z 399) by day 4. And only after that, under the
probable action of alkanesulfonate monooxygenase, the C−S bond was broken, and SO−3
was released to form a compound with m/z 319, with its transformation into PFHxA, and
after 7 days, this compound was detected in an amount of at least 70% of the sum of the
destruction products.
Thus, in the ﬁnal stage of cultivation, the compounds detected in the medium dissociated acid ion led to the identiﬁcation of perﬂuorohexanoic acid. The obtained data
allowed us to construct an assumed the scheme of destruction of C7-C10 PFCA (Figure 3).
Further investigation of the decomposition of substances by the studied strain is currently
not possible and requires further study of its catabolic capabilities. From available sources,
lower-molecular-weight fragments produced by PFCA destruction were observed only
in [23] but without conﬁrming the described genetic potential and partial mineralization by
ﬂuorine release. The literature on the toxicity of PFCA indicates that the shorter the F−C
chain, the more favorable its toxicological proﬁle. Accordingly, there is a clear rationale for
reducing the toxicity of PFCA in relation to human exposure, even by shortening its chain
by one link [65–67].
3.4. Fluoride Balance
In our case, it could be assumed that the destruction stops as the ﬂuoride ion level in
the medium reaches 19 mg/L (1 mM), the value at which, according to [68,69], this anion
becomes toxic at intracellular levels. But in our early studies, microorganisms remained
viable at concentrations exceeding 150 mg/L [70]. Therefore, the suppression of PFCA
deﬂuorination by its biodegradation products is more likely. And for cells initially having
the crcB gene, which encodes the ﬂuoride exporting protein [71] and controls the level of
ﬂuoride, when a potentially toxic concentration of it occurs, they organize its displacement
due to an electrochemical gradient, which is shown by the example of P. putida KT2440 [61].
According to the results obtained and the scheme presented, during biodegradation,
26.3 (growth on PFHpA), 46.0 (on PFOA), 61.6 (on PFNA), 74.1 (on PFDA), and 57.1 (on
PFOS) mg/L ﬂuoride ions should have been released into the culture medium according to
the calculated data. In contrast to the expected value, the actually detected concentration in
all the studied variants did not exceed 24.4 mg/L, i.e., the degree of extraction of F- only in
the case of growth on PFHpA was stoichiometric and tended to 100%, but in other variants,
this value did not exceed 48.5%. Some authors explain the non-stoichiometric release of
ﬂuorine during biodegradation by its redirection by the cell for their needs. For example,
Pseudomonas sp. strain 273 is a destructor of bichlorinated and ﬂuorinated alkanes with
medium and long chain (C7-C16)—for phospholipid biosynthesis [72–74].

## Page 10

Toxics 2023, 11, 1001
10 of 14
Figure 3. The proposed C7-C10 PFCA biodegradation pathways of Pseudomonas mosselii 5(3) on
the basis of metabolite analysis by LC-MS, ion chromatography and the results of whole genome
sequencing.
4. Conclusions
The Pseudomonas mosselii strain 5(3), which was isolated from herbicide-contaminated
soil, capable of destruction of C7-C10 PFCA, was described for the ﬁrst time. The genome
of strain 5(3) is fully sequenced, contains a total of 5134 genes—in particular, genes not
mentioned in microorganisms before—including the haloalkane dehalogenase gene (dhaA),
haloacetate dehalogenase H-1 gene (dehH1), ﬂuoride ion transporter gene (crcB) and alkanesulfonate monooxygenase gene (ssuE), which are crucial for the degradation of ﬂuorinated
compounds. The strain of P. mosselii 5(3), after 7 days of batch-cultivation with diverse of
C7-C10 PFCAs as the sole resource of carbon and energy, completely utilized them. The
results of the LC-MS analysis showed that the transformation takes place due to perﬂuoro-

## Page 11

Toxics 2023, 11, 1001
11 of 14
hexanoic acid with the release of various levels of stoichiometry (depending on PFCAs)
of mineralization indicators—ﬂuorine ions determined by ion chromatography. Thus,
the Pseudomonas mosselii strain 5(3) demonstrates a genetically conﬁrmed high potential
for the decomposition of C7-C10 PFCAs, and the results obtained will help both in the
fundamental exploration of cellular processes of the strain and in the practice of developing
biotechnologies for environmental rehabilitation from contamination with organoﬂuorine
compounds.
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https://
www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/toxics11121001/s1, Figure S1: Characteristics of LCMS distribution
of C7-C10 PFCAs.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.C.; methodology, S.C., S.S. and D.S.; software, G.H.;
validation, S.C., S.S. and D.C.; formal analysis, D.C.; investigation, D.S., S.S. and D.C.; resources,
S.C.; data curation, S.C. and D.C.; writing—original draft preparation, S.C.; writing—review and
editing, S.C. and G.H.; visualization, G.H., D.S. and S.S.; supervision, S.C.; project administration,
S.C.; funding acquisition, S.C. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the
manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the Russian Science Foundation, grant number 23-24-00154.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the
corresponding author on reasonable request.
Acknowledgments: The authors express their sincere gratitude to G.R. Kudoyarova for correcting
and editing the article in English.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or
in the decision to publish the results.
References
1.
Ross, I.; McDonough, J.; Miles, J.; Storch, P. A review of emerging technologies for remediation of PFASs. Remediation 2018, 28,
101–126. [CrossRef]
2.
Report of the Conference of the Parties of the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants on the Work of Its Fourth Meeting, 4–8
May//UNEP/POPS/COP.4/38; Stockholm Convention Secretariat: Geneva, Switzerland, 2009; pp. 66–69.
3.
Fujii, S.; Tanaka, S.; Hong Lien, N.P.; Qiu, Y.; Polprasert, C. New POPs in the water environment: Distribution, bioaccumulation
and treatment of perﬂuorinated compounds: A review paper. J. Water Supply Res. Technol.-AQUA 2007, 56, 313–326. [CrossRef]
4.
Nascimento, R.A.; Nunoo, D.B.O.; Bizkarguenaga, E.; Schultes, L.; Zabaleta, I.; Benskin, J.P.; Spano, S.; Leonel, J. Sulﬂuramid use
in Brazilian agriculture: A source of per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFASs) to the environment. Environ. Pollut. 2018, 242,
1436–1443. [CrossRef]
5.
Xia, C.; Diamond, M.L.; Peaslee, G.F.; Peng, H.; Blum, A.; Wang, Z.; Shalin, A.; Whitehead, H.D.; Green, M.; Schwartz-Narbonne,
H.; et al. Per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances in North American school uniforms. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2022, 56, 13845–13857.
[CrossRef]
6.
Schaider, L.A.; Balan, S.A.; Blum, A.; Andrews, D.Q.; Strynar, M.J.; Dickinson, M.E.; Lunderberg, D.M.; Lang, J.R.; Peaslee, G.F.
Fluorinated compounds in U.S. fast food packaging. Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett. 2017, 4, 105–111. [CrossRef]
7.
Pozo, K.; Moriera, L.B.; Karaskova, P.; Pribylova, P.; Klanova, J.; de Carvalho, M.U.; Maranho, L.A.; de Souza Abessa, D.M. Using
large amounts of ﬁreﬁghting foams releases per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFAS) into estuarine environments: A baseline
study in Latin America. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 2022, 182, 113938. [CrossRef]
8.
Prevedouros, K.; Cousins, I.T.; Buck, R.C.; Korzeniowski, S.H. Sources, fate and transport of perﬂuorocarboxylates. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 2006, 40, 32–44. [CrossRef]
9.
Wang, Y.; Munir, U.; Huang, Q. Occurrence of per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in soil: Sources, fate, and remediation.
Soil Environ. Health 2023, 1, 100004. [CrossRef]
10.
Ji, B.; Zhao, Y. World Proﬁle of Foreseeable Strategies for the Removal of Per- and Polyﬂuoroalkyl Substances (PFASs) from Water.
In Persistent Pollutants in Water and Advanced Treatment Technology; Springer Nature: Singapore, 2023; pp. 47–69.
11.
EPA 822-R-16-002; Health Effects Support Document for Perﬂuorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS). U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Ofﬁce of Water (4304T) Health and Ecological Criteria Division: Washington, DC, USA, 2016.

## Page 12

Toxics 2023, 11, 1001
12 of 14
12.
EPA 822-R16-003; Health Effects Support Document for Perﬂuorooctanoic Acid (PFOA). U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Ofﬁce of Water (4304T) Health and Ecological Criteria Division: Washington, DC, USA, 2016.
13.
Seo, S.-H. Health risk of Human Exposure to Perﬂuorinated Compounds (PFASs) in Hyeongsan River, Pohang. J. Environ. Anal.
Health Toxicol. 2022, 25, 77–84. [CrossRef]
14.
Calvert, L.; Green, M.P.; De Iuliis, G.N.; Dun, M.D.; Turner, B.D.; Clarke, B.O.; Eamens, A.L.; Roman, S.D.; Nixon, B. Assessment of
the Emerging Threat Posed by Perﬂuoroalkyl and Polyﬂuoroalkyl Substances to Male Reproduction in Humans. Front. Endocrinol.
2022, 12, 799043. [CrossRef]
15.
Cheng, J.; Vecitis, C.D.; Park, H.; Mader, B.T.; Hoffmann, M.R. Sonochemical degradation of perﬂuorooctane sulfonate (PFOS)
and perﬂuorooctanoate (PFOA) in landﬁll groundwater: Environmental matrix effects. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2008, 42, 8057–8063.
[CrossRef]
16.
Wang, F.; Shih, K.; Lu, X.; Liu, C. Mineralization behavior of ﬂuorine in perﬂuorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) during thermal treatment
of lime-conditioned sludge. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2013, 47, 2621–2627. [CrossRef]
17.
Marquínez-Marquínez, A.N.; Loor-Molina, N.S.; Quiroz-Fernández, L.S.; Maddela, N.R.; Luque, R.; Rodríguez-Díaz, J.M. Recent
advances in the remediation of perﬂuoroalkylated and polyﬂuoroalkylated contaminated sites. Environ. Res. 2023, 219, 115152.
[CrossRef]
18.
Kabiri, S.; Navarro, D.A.; Hamad, S.A.; Grimison, C.; Higgins, C.P.; Mueller, J.F.; Kookana, R.S.; McLaughlin, M.J. Physical and
chemical properties of carbon-based sorbents that affect the removal of per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances from solution and
soil. Sci. Total Environ. 2023, 875, 162653. [CrossRef]
19.
Mayer-Blackwell, K.; Sewell, H.; Fincker, M.; Spormann, A.M. Comparative physiology of organohalide-respiring bacteria. In
Organohalide-Respiring Bacteria; Adrian, L., Löfﬂer, F.E., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2016; pp. 259–280.
20.
Wackett, L.P. Why Is the biodegradation of polyﬂuorinated compounds so rare? mSphere 2021, 6, 10–1128. [CrossRef]
21.
Chetverikov, S.P.; Sharipov, D.A.; Korshunova, T.Y.; Loginov, O.N. Degradation of perﬂuorooctanyl sulfonate by strain Pseudomonas plecoglossicida 2.4-D. Appl. Biochem. Microbiol. 2017, 53, 533–538. [CrossRef]
22.
Shaw, D.M.J.; Munoz, G.; Bottos, E.M.; Duy, S.V.; Sauve, S.; Liu, J.; Van Hamme, J.D. Degradation and deﬂuorination of 6:2
ﬂuorotelomer sulfonamidoalkyl betaine and 6:2 ﬂuorotelomer sulfonate by Gordonia sp. strain NB4-1Y under sulfur-limiting
conditions. Sci. Total Environ. 2019, 647, 690–698. [CrossRef]
23.
Huang, S.; Jaffé, P.R. Deﬂuorination of perﬂuorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perﬂuorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) by Acidimicrobium sp.
Strain A6. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2019, 53, 11410–11419. [CrossRef]
24.
Yu, Y.; Zhang, K.; Li, Z.; Ren, C.; Chen, J.; Lin, Y.-H.; Liu, J.; Men, Y. Microbial cleavage of c–f bonds in two C6 Per- and
polyﬂuorinated compounds via reductive deﬂuorination. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2020, 54, 14393–14402. [CrossRef]
25.
Ruiz-Urigüen, M.; Shuai, W.; Huang, S.; Jaffé, P.R. Biodegradation of PFOA in microbial electrolysis cells by Acidimicrobiaceae sp.
strain A6. Chemosphere 2022, 292, 133506. [CrossRef]
26.
Kwon, B.G.; Lim, H.-J.; Na, S.-H.; Choi, B.-I.; Shin, D.-S.; Chung, S.-Y. Biodegradation of perﬂuorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) as an
emerging contaminant. Chemosphere 2014, 109, 221–225. [CrossRef]
27.
Yi, L.B.; Chai, L.Y.; Xie, Y.; Peng, Q.J.; Peng, Q.Z. Isolation, identiﬁcation, and degradation performance of a PFOA-degrading
strain. Genet. Mol. Res. 2016, 15, 235–246. [CrossRef]
28.
Beškoski, V.P.; Yamamoto, A.; Nakano, T.; Yamamoto, K.; Matsumura, C.; Motegi, M.; Beškoski, L.S.; Inui, H. Deﬂuorination of
perﬂuoroalkyl acids is followed by production of monoﬂuorinated fatty acids. Sci. Total Environ. 2018, 15, 355–359. [CrossRef]
29.
Chiriac, F.L.; Stoica, C.; Iftode, C.; Pirvu, F.; Petre, V.A.; Paun, I.; Pascu, L.F.; Vasile, G.G.; Nita-Lazar, M. Bacterial Biodegradation
of Perﬂuorooctanoic Acid (PFOA) and Perﬂuorosulfonic Acid (PFOS) Using Pure Pseudomonas Strains. Sustainability 2023, 15,
14000. [CrossRef]
30.
Zhang, Z.; Sarkar, D.; Biswas, J.K.; Datta, R. Biodegradation of per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFAS): A review. Bioresour.
Technol. 2022, 344, 126223. [CrossRef]
31.
Kiel, M.; Karl-Heinrich, E. The biodegradation vs. biotransformation of ﬂuorosubstituted aromatics. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
2015, 99, 7433–7464. [CrossRef]
32.
Nogales, J.; García, J.L.; Díaz, E. Degradation of Aromatic Compounds in Pseudomonas: A Systems Biology View. In Aerobic
Utilization of Hydrocarbons, Oils and Lipids: Handbook of Hydrocarbon and Lipid Microbiology; Rojo, F., Ed.; Springer: Cham,
Switzerland, 2017; pp. 1–49.
33.
Yi, L.; Tang, C.; Peng, Q.; Peng, Q.; Chai, L. Draft genome sequence of perﬂuorooctane acid-degrading bacterium Pseudomonas
parafulva YAB-1. Genome Announc. 2015, 3, e00935-15. [CrossRef]
34.
Harris, J.; Gross, M.; Kemball, J.; Farajollahi, S.; Dennis, P.; Sitko, J.; Steel, J.J.; Almand, E.; Kelley-Loughnane, N.; Varaljay, V.A.
Draft Genome Sequence of the Bacterium Delftia acidovorans Strain D4B, Isolated from Soil. Microbiol. Resour. Announc. 2021, 10,
e0063521. [CrossRef]
35.
Spaan, K.M.; van Noordenburg, C.; Plassmann, M.M.; Schultes, L.; Shaw, S.; Berger, M.; Heide-Jørgensen, M.P.; Rosing-Asvid, A.;
Granquist, S.M.; Dietz, R.; et al. Fluorine mass balance and suspect screening in marine mammals from the northern hemisphere.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 2020, 54, 4046–4058. [CrossRef]
36.
Brendel, S.; Fetter, É.; Staude, C.; Vierke, L.; Biegel-Engler, A. Short-chain perﬂuoroalkyl acids: Environmental concerns and a
regulatory strategy under REACH. Environ. Sci. Eur. 2018, 30, 9. [CrossRef]

## Page 13

Toxics 2023, 11, 1001
13 of 14
37.
Li, F.; Duan, J.; Tian, S.; Ji, H.; Zhu, Y.; Wei, Z.; Zhao, D. Short-chain per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances in aquatic systems:
Occurrence, impacts and treatment. Chem. Eng. J. 2020, 380, 122506. [CrossRef]
38.
Sambrook, J.; Russell, D.W. Puriﬁcation of nucleic acids by extraction with phenol: Chloroform. Cold Spring Harb. Protoc. 2006,
2006, pdb.prot4455.
39.
Bolger, A.M.; Lohse, M.; Usadel, B. Trimmomatic: A ﬂexible trimmer for Illumina Sequence Data. Bioinformatics 2014, 30,
2114–2120. [CrossRef]
40.
Bankevich, A.; Nurk, S.; Antipov, D.; Gurevich, A.; Dvorkin, M.; Kulikov, A.S.; Lesin, V.; Nikolenko, S.; Pham, S.; Prjibelski, A.;
et al. SPAdes: A new genome assembly algorithm and its applications to single-cell sequencing. J. Comput. Biol. 2012, 19, 455–477.
[CrossRef]
41.
Langmead, B.; Salzberg, S.L. Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nat. Methods 2012, 9, 357–359. [CrossRef]
42.
Walker, B.J.; Abeel, T.; Shea, T.; Priest, M.; Abouelliel, A.; Sakthikumar, S.; Cuomo, C.A.; Zeng, Q.; Wortman, J.; Young, S.K.
Pilon: An integrated tool for comprehensive microbial variant detection and genome assembly improvement. PLoS ONE 2014, 9,
e112963. [CrossRef]
43.
Yoon, S.H.; Ha, S.M.; Lim, J.M.; Kwon, S.J.; Chun, J. A large-scale evaluation of algorithms to calculate average nucleotide identity.
Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 2017, 110, 1281–1286. [CrossRef]
44.
Meier-Kolthoff, J.P.; Sardà Carbasse, J.; Peinado-Olarte, R.L.; Göker, M. TYGS and LPSN: A database tandem for fast and reliable
genome-based classiﬁcation and nomenclature of prokaryotes. Nucleic Acid Res. 2022, 50, D801–D807. [CrossRef]
45.
Seemann, T. Prokka: Rapid prokaryotic genome annotation. Bioinformatics 2014, 30, 2068–2069. [CrossRef]
46.
Altschul, S.F.; Gish, W.; Miller, W.; Myers, E.W.; Lipman, D.J. Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol. 1990, 215, 403–410.
[CrossRef]
47.
Lefort, V.; Desper, R.; Gascuel, O. FastME 2.0: A Comprehensive, Accurate, and Fast Distance-Based Phylogeny Inference Program.
Mol. Biol. Evol. 2015, 32, 2798–2800. [CrossRef]
48.
Farris, J.S. Estimating phylogenetic trees from distance matrices. Am. Nat. 1972, 6, 645–667. [CrossRef]
49.
Letunic, I.; Bork, P. Interactive Tree of Life (iTOL) v5: An online tool for phylogenetic tree display and annotation. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2021, 49, W293–W296. [CrossRef]
50.
Meier-Kolthoff, J.P.; Goker, M. TYGS is an automated high-throughput platform for state-of-the-art genome-based taxonomy. Nat.
Commun. 2019, 10, 2182. [CrossRef]
51.
Meier-Kolthoff, J.P.; Hahnke, R.L.; Petersen, J.; Scheuner, C.; Michael, V.; Fiebig, A.; Rohde, C.; Rohde, M.; Fartmann, B.;
Goodwin, L.A.; et al. Complete genome sequence of DSM 30083(T), the type strain (U5/41(T)) of Escherichia coli, and a proposal
for delineating subspecies in microbial taxonomy. Stand. Genom. Sci. 2014, 9, 2. [CrossRef]
52.
Lee, I.; Ouk Kim, Y.; Park, S.C.; Chun, J. OrthoANI: An improved algorithm and software for calculating average nucleotide
identity. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 2016, 66, 1100–1103. [CrossRef]
53.
Raymond, R.L. Microbial oxidation of n-parafﬁnic hydrocarbons. Dev. Ind. Microbiol. 1961, 2, 23–54.
54.
Bertani, G. Studies on Lysogenesis I. J. Bacteriol. 1951, 62, 293–300. [CrossRef]
55.
Olson, R.D.; Assaf, R.; Brettin, T.; Conrad, N.; Cucinell, C.; Davis, J.J.; Dempsey, D.M.; Dickerman, A.; Dietrich, E.M.;
Kenyon, R.W.; et al. Introducing the Bacterial and Viral Bioinformatics Resource Center (BV-BRC): A resource combining PATRIC,
IRD and ViPR. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023, 51, D678–D689. [CrossRef]
56.
Chun, J.; Oren, A.; Ventosa, A.; Christensen, H.; Arahal, D.R.; da Costa, M.S.; Rooney, A.P.; Yi, H.; Xu, X.W.; De Meyer, S.; et al.
Proposed minimal standards for the use of genome data for the taxonomy of prokaryotes. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 2018, 68,
461–466. [CrossRef]
57.
Marchetto, F.; Roverso, M.; Righetti, D.; Bogialli, S.; Filippini, F.; Bergantino, E.; Sforza, E. Bioremediation of Per- and PolyFluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) by Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803: A Chassis for a Synthetic Biology Approach. Life 2021, 11, 1300.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.
Li, Y.; Yue, Y.; Zhang, H.; Yang, Z.; Wang, H.; Tian, S.; Wang, J.; Zhang, Q.; Wang, W. Harnessing Fluoroacetate Dehalogenase for
Deﬂuorination of Fluorocarboxylic Acids: In Silico and In Vitro. Approach. Environ. Int. 2019, 131, 104999. [CrossRef]
59.
Trang, B.; Li, Y.; Xue, X.S.; Ateia, M.; Houk, K.N.; Dichtel, W.R. Low-temperature mineralization of perﬂuorocarboxylic acids.
Science 2022, 377, 839–845. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60.
Park, C.; Shin, B.; Park, W. Protective Role of Bacterial Alkanesulfonate Monooxygenase under Oxidative Stress. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 2020, 86, e00692-20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61.
Calero, P.; Gurdo, N.; Nikel, P.I. Role of the CrcB transporter of Pseudomonas putida in the multi-level stress response elicited by
mineral ﬂuoride. Environ. Microbiol. 2022, 24, 5082–5104. [CrossRef]
62.
Wackett, L.P. Pseudomonas: Versatile biocatalysts for PFAS. Environ. Microbiol. 2022, 24, 2882–2889. [CrossRef]
63.
Winsor, G.L.; Van Rossum, T.; Lo, R.; Khaira, B.; Whiteside, M.D.; Hancock, R.E.; Brinkman, F.S. Pseudomonas Genome Database:
Facilitating user-friendly, comprehensive comparisons of microbial genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009, 37, D483–D488. [CrossRef]
64.
Winsor, G.L.; Grifﬁths, E.J.; Lo, R.; Dhillon, B.K.; Shay, J.A.; Brinkman, F.S. Enhanced annotations and features for comparing
thousands of Pseudomonas genomes in the Pseudomonas genome database. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016, 44, D646–D653. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
65.
Luz, A.L.; Anderson, J.K.; Goodrum, P.; Durda, J. Perﬂuorohexanoic acid toxicity, part I: Development of a chronic human health
toxicity value for use in risk assessment. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2019, 103, 41–55. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

## Page 14

Toxics 2023, 11, 1001
14 of 14
66.
Zango, Z.U.; Ethiraj, B.; Al-Mubaddel, F.S.; Alam, M.M.; Lawal, M.A.; Kadir, H.A.; Khoo, K.S.; Garba, Z.N.; Usman, F.; Zango,
M.U.; et al. An overview on human exposure, toxicity, solid-phase microextraction and adsorptive removal of perﬂuoroalkyl
carboxylic acids (PFCAs) from water matrices. Environ. Res. 2023, 231 Pt 2, 116102. [CrossRef]
67.
Han, J.S.; Jang, S.; Son, H.Y.; Kim, Y.B.; Kim, Y.; Noh, J.H.; Kim, M.J.; Lee, B.S. Subacute dermal toxicity of perﬂuoroalkyl carboxylic
acids: Comparison with different carbon-chain lengths in human skin equivalents and systemic effects of perﬂuoroheptanoic acid
in Sprague Dawley rats. Arch. Toxicol. 2020, 94, 523–539. [CrossRef]
68.
Ji, C.; Stockbridge, R.B.; Miller, C. Bacterial ﬂuoride resistance, Fluc channels and the weak acid accumulation effect. J. Gen.
Physiol. 2014, 144, 257–261. [CrossRef]
69.
McIlwain, B.C.; Michal, T.R.; Stockbridge, R.B. Membrane exporters of ﬂuoride ion. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 2021, 90, 559–579.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
70.
Chetverikov, S.P.; Loginov, O.N. A new Ensifer adhaerens strain M1 is capable of transformation of perﬂuorocarboxylic acids.
Microbiology 2019, 88, 115–117. [CrossRef]
71.
Stockbridge, R.B.; Lim, H.H.; Otten, R.; Williams, C.; Shane, T.; Weinberg, Z.; Miller, C. Fluoride resistance and transport by
riboswitch-controlled CLC antiporters. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2012, 109, 15289–15294. [CrossRef]
72.
Xie, Y.; Chen, G.; May, A.L.; Yan, J.; Brown, L.P.; Powers, J.B.; Campagna, S.R.; Löfﬂer, F.E. Pseudomonas sp. strain 273 degrades
ﬂuorinated alkanes. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2020, 54, 14994–15003. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73.
Xie, Y.; May, A.L.; Chen, G.; Brown, L.P.; Powers, J.B.; Tague, E.D.; Campagna, S.R.; Löfﬂer, F.E. Pseudomonas sp. strain 273
incorporates organoﬂuorine into the lipid bilayer during growth with ﬂuorinated alkanes. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2022, 56,
8155–8166. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74.
Xie, Y.; Chen, G.; Ramirez, D.; Yan, J.; Löfﬂer, F.E. Complete Genome Sequence of Pseudomonas sp. Strain 273, a HaloalkaneDegrading Bacterium. Microbiol. Resour. Announc. 2023, 12, e0017623. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

